   J YFUL
INFOGRAPHICS
A friendly, human approach to data


          Nigel Holmes
AK Peters Visualization Series
This book is part of the AK Peters Visualization series, which aims to capture what
visualization is today in all its variety and diversity, giving voice to researchers, practitioners,
designers, and enthusiasts.Visualization plays an ever-more prominent role in the world, as
we communicate about and analyze data. The series encompasses books from all subfields of
visualization, including visual analytics, information visualization, scientific visualization, data
journalism, infographics, and their connection to adjacent areas such as text analysis, digital
humanities, data art, or augmented and virtual reality.
Series Editors
Alberto Cairo, University of Miami, USA
Tamara Munzner, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

Recent titles
Building Science Graphics
An Illustrated Guide to Communicating Science through Diagrams and Visualizations
Jen Christiansen

Joyful Infographics
A Friendly, Human Approach to Data
Nigel Holmes

Questions in Dataviz
A Design-Driven Process for Data Visualization
Neil Richards

Making with Data
Physical Design and Craft in a Data-Driven World
Edited by Samuel Huron, Till Nagel, Lora Oehlberg, Wesley Willett

Mobile Data Visualization
Edited by Bongshin Lee, Raimund Dachselt, Petra Isenberg, Eun Kyoung Choe

Data Sketches
Nadieh Bremer, Shirley Wu

Visualizing with Text
Richard Brath

Interactive Visual Data Analysis
Christian Tominski, Heidrun Schumann

Data-Driven Storytelling
Nathalie Henry Riche, Christophe Hurter, Nicholas Diakopoulos, Sheelagh Carpendale


For more information about this series please visit:
https://www.routledge.com/AK-Peters-Visualization-Series/book-series/CRCVIS
Foreword
The main goal of a visualization is to reveal and inform, but what if it could also make us
smile? Humor—particularly the type of genial humor that Nigel Holmes has always favored
in his long and fruitful career—can be a powerful tool in capable hands. This book, which we
think is a great peek into the way Nigel thinks about design, explains why, when, and how to
use such a tool.

Not so long ago, humor in visualization had bad press. Some popular authors extolled
the alleged virtues of spare visual styles, rejected any joy not derived from the ecstatic
contemplation of data, and chastised designers who inserted ornament into their
visualizations. Such authors were sometimes understood—or, better said, misunderstood—
as outlining universal rules of visualization, when in reality they were simply making a
persuasive case for their own design preferences and for their personal opinions about
elegance, truth, and goodness.

Nigel Holmes makes his own persuasive case in Joyful Infographics: humorous elements, if
they don’t distort the information represented in the graphic, aren’t just decoration; they
are harmless, and in certain cases they can even be beneficial, as recent research tentatively
suggests: a touch of humor in a visualization—if it’s sensible and appropriate, depending on
factors such as topic or audience—may make it warmer, friendlier, more approachable, and
inviting. Perhaps it’s time to smile a bit more.
                                                       Alberto Cairo, University of Miami, USA
                               Tamara Munzner, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
       Some images have been greatly reduced
from their original published size in magazines or books.

     This symbol     next to an image means that
            they are on the book’s website
              joyfulinfographics.com
             where you can enlarge them
              and give your tired eyes
                      a break.
First edition published 2023
by CRC Press
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742

and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN

© 2023 Nigel Holmes

CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers
have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been
acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted,
or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written
permission from the publishers.

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works
that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Holmes, Nigel, 1942- author.
Title: Joyful infographics: a friendly, human approach to data / Nigel Holmes.

Description: First edition. | Boca Raton: AK Peters, CRC Press, 2023. |
Series: AK Peters visualization series | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022022725 (print) | LCCN 2022022726 (ebook) | ISBN
9781032119656 (hbk) | ISBN 9781032115580 (pbk) | ISBN 9781003222361 (ebk)
Subjects: LCSH: Information visualization. | Graphic arts. | Caricatures and cartoons.

Classification: LCC QA76.9.I52 H656 2023 (print) | LCC QA76.9.I52 (ebook)
| DDC 001.4/226--dc23/eng/20220527
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022022725
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022022726

ISBN: 9781032119656 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032115580 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003222361 (ebk)

DOI: 10.1201/9781003222361

Publisher's note: This book has been prepared from camera-ready copy provided by the author.
Contents
Dedication.......page 1
Warming up.......3
It’s good to exercise

Introduction.......7
In which I try to define Joyful and Infographics

Influences.......11
Great Uncle George, Monty Python, Eadweard Muybridge, Thelonious Monk (among others)

Pictorial data through the ages.......25
A timeline

Nine ways to make your graphics joyful.......37
Audience, prosody, context, metaphor, simplify, edit, label, draw, add humans

Icons.......97
From         to <3

Joyful presentations.......127
Speak up

Science.......139
Serious fun for all

Chartoons.......173
Including a chart about diamonds

Don’t do this!.......179
Really awful things I’ve done that you really shouldn’t

Appendix       Stuff I wanted to say but which didn’t quite fit......185

Reading list.......193

Thank you.......199

Credits.......202

Index.......204
                                                       1




                Dedication
                To Nannie Hay,
   who lived with us and taught me to read
while my father fought in North Africa and Italy,
  and my mother drove ambulances in Hull,
        Yorkshire, during World War 2.



                                         My brother,
                                         Jeremy



       Nannie



                                         Me

                   Off to the seaside
                with bucket and spade.
                                                                                                    3




                                         Warming up



Let’s begin with some stretches.

I was a late comer to exercising regularly (three times a week, if I try hard). I don’t love it, but
it’s important. We sit at our computers most of the time. It’s good to give the body a break
and move around. At least we should stretch our fingers.




Sit like this, Sit like this,
but not for but not for
too long       too long

                                Sit like this,                                            Try it now!
                                but not for
                                too long


Wait, you thought this was a book about infographics?

Stretching is like sketching; you are getting ready for the real work(out) to follow. I made visual
notes when I started to work with a trainer in 2007, because I needed reminders about his
exercises on the days I wasn’t working out with him. After a rotator cuff shoulder injury a
few years later, I made more finished memory aids, for myself and the sports therapist (below).
4 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



My trainer’s routines were fleshed out in various magazine commissions, and I included one in
a spread from my book Instant Expert. I’ve used part of that graphic to draw attention to some
of ideas in the book you are reading now (opposite).

When I exercise (at a local YMCA) I find a room where there’s no loud music. I suppose the
people who run the gym assume that energetic rock and rap helps you to be energetic, pump-
ing you up. For me silence is better. It’s the same with infographics: leaving space—white space,
where data can breathe—is important. Exercising in silence also gives you space and time to
think about what you should be getting on with: for about a year, that’s been writing this book.
Ever ready with a pencil and paper, I interrupt grunting on the floor to scribble quick thoughts
that I might forget back at the computer. Ideas come at the oddest times. Take notes.

Try a few of these stretches at home. No gym necessary. (Below, classic yoga sun salutation.)




Exercise graphics for two magazines: Sports IIlustrated for Women…   …and Details
                                                   WARMING UP 5




Feeling better (or at least virtuous)? Now, on to the book itself…
                                                                                                           7




                                        Introduction



First, definitions of Joyful and Infographics.

I have long advocated using a touch of humor in information graphics as a way to make friends
with readers, to help them relax when confronted with a string of numbers or obscure
scientific concepts. My goal has always been to make reading, understanding, and looking at
graphics, a pleasurable experience—not like homework. If I can raise a smile, I’ll be half-way
to helping readers see what I am trying to explain. That smile is a smile of recognition, a
realization that what I’m doing is using a visual language—and an approach in general—that
is friendly and understandable, however complex the data or difficult the subject matter.
There’s a whole school of thought that loathes this idea—it is precisely the lighter approach
that upsets the guardians of humorless, minimalist, statistical purity. Apparently, any deviation
from, or addition to ‘just the facts’ is wrong. Dreadfully wrong. Important-sounding pseudo-
scientific theories such as ‘optimal data-ink ratio’ are invoked. Architect Adolf Loos’ 1910
lecture Ornament and Crime was a big influence on ivory-tower-dwelling chart purists, and
Mies van de Rohe’s famous ‘less is more’ phrase became the overriding graphic tenet.

It’s time to cue the equally famous ‘less is a bore,’ from Robert Venturi, another architect.
Why do architects have the best quotes?

When it comes to the role of humor in communication, I like this quote from the legendary
graphic designer Paul Rand about avoiding visual gimmicks in annual reports. This is from his
Thoughts on Design (1947):

‘The visual message which professes to be profound or elegant often boomerangs as mere pretension;
and the frame of mind which looks at humor as trivial and flighty mistakes the shadow for the
substance. In short, the notion that the humorous approach to visual communication is undignified or
belittling is sheer nonsense … “True humor,” says Thomas Carlyle, “springs not more from the head
than from the heart; it is not contempt, its essence is love, it issues not in laughter, but in still smiles,
which lie far deeper.”’

Well said, Paul and Tom (and I bet Dick and Harry agree).
8 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



‘Humorous’ might not be the right description of my approach. I am not suggesting that all
infographics (or any of them, actually) should be funny. By humor, I mean good humor, a gentle
friendliness, and joy and joyful capture that feeling. It’s the delight in understanding—seeing—
the story inside a dense data set or a touchy subject. I know that some things that we are
called upon to explain need to be treated with extreme care. There’s no room for fun in a
graphic about cancer, or inequality, or terrorism, or abortion, but these subjects and many
others nevertheless deserve a clear, reader-friendly treatment. A load of data, dumped in front
of readers, viewers or users may contain all the facts, but it doesn’t necessarily explain them,
and might even scare the intended audience away. Joyful in this sense, means happily revealing
the meaning.

Infographics are easier to define. They are simply what the word itself says: information,
presented graphically. Infographics have a visual component—sometimes it’s a pictorial
representation of the subject, sometimes abstract bars and lines—and there’s usually some
explanatory text, too. I’m including maps, charts, diagrams, instructions, signs, and symbols in
the definition.

I should note that the word ‘graphic’ is also used to describe a vividly detailed description or
visualization, which might even come with a warning that it could offend or shock. But a shock
of recognition is just a small step beyond the smile of recognition that I’m seeking, and while
I don’t intend to shock, I find clarity, paired with a friendly approach even when dealing with
shocking information, is a good way to explain it.

Most of my work has been for print—magazines and newspapers—lots of it before
‘infographics’ was a word. In their book Eyes on the News, Mario Garcia and Pegie Stark studied
how readers generally approach the printed page: first, they are drawn to the pictures or
graphics, especially if they are colored, then they read the captions and headline and perhaps
the first few lines of text, and only then do they commit to reading the whole article. Clearly,
pictures, infographics, maps, and icons are powerful attractants.

When first I arrived at Time magazine in 1977, some writers, especially those working in the
Economy and Business section, balked at my graphics being prominently displayed at the top of
their pages.What’s more, the graphics were bigger than they had been under previous editors,
so the writers were upset at losing precious space for their words. It was only when the
magazine got letters from readers telling us that they could understand the stories better now
that there was some graphic help on the page, that the formerly disgruntled writers willingly
gave up some of the proverbial 1,000 words for a picture. (Or 10,000 words if you think that
famous maxim should be attributed to Confucius. Newspaper editor Arthur Brisbane, in an
article about journalism and publicity in 1911, seems to have been the source that reduced the
number to 1,000.) I don’t think a picture, or a graphic, is worth a thousand words; it’s worth
exactly as many words as are needed to explain what it’s replacing.
                                                                          INTRODUCTION 9



My hope is that Joyful Infographics will show you some ways to help readers understand more
clearly what you are explaining to them, and at the same time make them feel good about that
understanding. And I hope it will help you make your ‘pictures’ worthy of those 1,000—or
10,000—words.
                                                                                             11




                                      Influences



There was one artist in my family, dad’s uncle George. At Christmas, his cards were hand-
printed etchings of country scenes. He was an engineer, working in his father’s tannery, but
he had a particular interest in sailing, and he drew the local commercial fishing sailboats that
worked in the North Sea and along England’s coasts.The drawings were immaculate engineers’
plans and side views of boats, very different from the sketchiness of his Christmas etchings.




    Great Uncle George…              …one of his Christmas
                                     etchings (top), and his
                                      drawing of the canoe
                                            yawl, Eel, 1896
12 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



What fascinated me more than the etchings was his black and white map of the River Hull that
hung in our living room. It was a straightforward, flat map of the river (a tributary of the much
larger River Humber) that flowed through the center of the City of Hull, in Yorkshire, about
10 miles east of the village of Swanland, where we lived. Arranged around the map, (opposite)
George had drawn realistic bridges that spanned the river, appearing as you would see them
if you were walking there. I loved the combination of two- and three-dimensional graphics in
one picture.

Years later, I was commissioned by the Observer magazine to draw the fishing fleet that used
to sail around England’s coasts. The magazine’s art director, Brian Haynes, gave me a set of old
plans of these boats to use as reference. They were great uncle George’s drawings.




                                                                      One of the drawings
                                                                      that Brian gave me
                                                                      as reference…




                                                                                  …and the first
                                                                                  sketch I made
                                                                                  for the job




                                                                                  Next pages:
                                                                                  some of my
                                                                                  drawings from
                                                                                  the Observer
                                                                                  article.
INFLUENCES 13
    14 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Norfolk Wherry                            Humber Keel Boat




                             Aldeburgh Sprat Boat




     Galway Hooker                        Severn Trow
                                           INFLUENCES 15




             Thames Barge


This is a selection of the fishing boats
I drew in 1969 for the Observer
Magazine, based on great uncle
George’s drawings.

It would have been an easier job if I’d
had a computer then!

The ones on the left are all drawn to
the same scale; this page is enlarged.
16 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



About the same time that I was engrossed by George’s river map, aged nine or ten, I ‘borrowed’
an atlas from my older brother, Jeremy, and never gave it back. A Pictorial Atlas of the British Isles,
by H. Alnwick, published in 1937, was filled with tiny, colorful illustrations of people swarming
all over the land masses. Bordering each spread were black silhouettes of men, women, and
children working and playing, together with buildings, factories, trains, and bridges. There was
a gentle sense of humor about the whole book—I imagined conversations going on between
the little people standing up on the maps—it showed me that geography could be fun. Just
like the drawings on uncle George’s map, the little figures added a human touch, but were also
informative. I used the book as a real reference atlas for a little too long!




From the ‘borrowed’ atlas: we lived in Swanland, a little village about 6 miles east of Hull (number 35, above)


In England there’s a love of silliness, and many of the influences on my work have little to do
with information design, but are important to fostering my sense of humor. Most nights, after
a family dinner, my dad would suddenly get up and leave the room, only to return a minute
later wearing an old hat of his (or one of my mother’s) pulled down to his eyebrows. It made
us all laugh. No sooner had he done this little performance, he left the room just as abruptly,
and then would reappear, innocently oblivious, as though nothing had happened.

We were probably eating chocolates during these antics. Unlike Forrest Gump’s maxim from
his mama, ‘Life is like a box of chocolates.You never know what you’re gonna get,’ we knew exactly
what we were gonna get, because there was a little graphic with a picture of each one right
there in the box. (Listen to the George Harrison song Savoy Truffle on the Beatles’ White
                                                                                   INFLUENCES 17



Album; it’s an almost literal recitation of the list inside Mackintosh’s Good News chocolates.
Not counting uncle George’s map, those explanatory diagrams were my first encounter with
joyful infographics. I liked the chocolates, too.




        A map of the Beatles’ inspiration                     Cover by Barnett Freedman


My father gave me a book of Edward Lear’s nonsense poems (The Owl and the Pussycat, etc.)
and limericks (‘There was an old lady from…’). It had a wonderful cover by Barnett Freedman.
Lear’s scratchy illustrations were just right for the silliness of his poems. They were nothing
like his watercolors of exotic landscapes in far-off lands, or his paintings of parrots, drawn life-
size from live and stuffed examples, for the Zoological Society in 1830–32, when he was 20.

Talking of parrots, John Cleese’s sketch about trying to return a dead one to the pet store that
sold it to him, from Monty Python’s Flying Circus, which started on BBC TV in 1969, still makes
me laugh. The whole Monty Python troupe lampooned English attitudes and class divisions.
They made fun of pomposity, urging us not to take anything, especially ourselves, too seriously.




John Cleese from the Ministry of Silly Walks

Python was following in the footsteps of a classic BBC radio program from the 1950s, The Goon
Show, which starred comedian Michael Bentine, Harry Secombe (a great Welsh singer), Spike
Milligan (a manically funny guy), and an as yet unfamous Peter Sellers. The four of them played
with words, sounds and non sequiturs. When I was in hospital after having had my appendix
removed, I was given headphones to listen to the radio, but I had to take them off because I
couldn’t stop laughing at the Goons. It hurt my stomach too much.
18 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



At boarding school, I was thrilled to get Punch magazine every week, forwarded on to me from
a favorite aunt, rolled up in a special brown paper mailing thing. As well as the satirical articles
and cartoons—my favorite Punch cartoonist, and some-time Art Editor, was Kenneth Bird,
who signed his spare, single-line drawings ‘Fougasse’—the magazine’s advertisements often
                                      included tiny infographics in red and black (a detail, below).




                                                                         I longed to have a car-
                                                                         toon published in the
                                                                         magazine, and sent them
                                                                         some of my efforts. I
                                                                         can’t find whatever it
                                                                         was that I sent but I did
                                                                         keep the rejection slips
                                                                         (left). Some kind per-
                                                                         son in the office took
                                                                         the trouble to write a
                                                                         friendly note on them.

Two eccentric Englishmen, the photographer Eadweard Muybridge (with a splendidly odd
first name), and the sculptor, letterer, and artist Eric Gill had a big impact on me. Muybridge
was taking photos of the American West when he was hired in 1878 by Leland Stanford, the
founder of Stanford University, to prove the theory (and potentially win a bet) that at some
point during a horse’s gallop, all four hooves are off the ground at the same time. Muybridge
lined up 12 cameras in a row, with trip wires extending from their shutter mechanisms to a
white board wall. A horse and jockey galloped across the front of the wall, tripping the wires
as they swept past, thus taking a sequence of 12 separate still photographs of animal and rider
in motion. Stanford’s theory was proved. (Opposite.)

Apart from the beautiful simplicity of the images themselves, Muybridge’s sequences of
different animals and humans in motion are a great resource for artists to see how animals
and people really move. Many graphic designers, myself included, have traced his photographs.
I hope we have not forgotten how revolutionary they were.

My other eccentric English influencer, Eric Gill, created simple, black & white wood engravings,
and also the typeface Gill Sans (1928-30), which he based on classical Roman engraved
                                                                                           INFLUENCES 19




How Muybridge set up his cameras to prove that all four hooves are off the ground when galloping
20 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Shameless tracing: identifying different owners’ colors, from Radio Times, June 1970.
Muybridge was a big help! (Top right shows all four hooves off the ground.)
                                                                                    INFLUENCES 21



letterforms and proportions that gave his font the same easy legibility as a serif face, in contrast
to the more mechanical sans fonts that were popular at the time. Gill was interested in giving
people a pleasant, but still ‘modern’ reading experience. Gill Sans remains one of the only sans
serif fonts that one might use for the entire text of a book, like this one.




                     Eric Gill wore an odd hat…      …but drew a lovely font


In 1966, I traveled around America in a Greyhound bus. An advertisement (or what remains
of it, since I haphazardly cut it out of a magazine) for something to do with ‘high-treated
alloy steel’ had a huge influence on me. Lines in your artwork didn’t have to be black! You’d
still draw them in black, but then instruct the printer to print them in a color. My eyes were
opened to production possibilities: drawing could now be excitingly separated from the way
it appeared in print. This was 11 years before Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak introduced the
Apple 1 in 1976, and a further 8 years before we had Macintoshes, by which time my small
insight would be thought pathetically naïve.




                   This simple thing opened the way to a kind of graphic freedom.
22 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Music might seem to be an odd influence. I listen to jazz a lot, and accompany my favorite
musicians on drums when no one is listening. Pianist Thelonious Monk’s odd use of silence
taught me the value of adding empty space to graphics, allowing important parts to be ‘heard.’
Also, Monk had huge hands, leading some to think that this accounted for ‘mistakes’ when he
played. What sounded like slip-ups made Monk all the more human to me. Monk said: ‘There
are no wrong notes.’




       Monk’s big hand                                                                Miles’ simplicity




in an article for the Information Design Journal, I wrote about how trumpeter Miles Davis
influenced me: ‘When designing an icon, I use the computer primarily to simplify the image; to find
the most economical way to represent the subject; to take stuff away, rather than puffing it up by
adding extraneous, and all-too-easily produced effects. Listening to Miles’ early work—an unmistakable,
simple sound—I see/hear the equivalent of a one-line drawing. He unfolded a spare line of melody,
unfussy, and without the helter-skelter of notes that his fellow beboppers were playing at the time. In
the same way, graphic symbols work best when they are simply conceived and executed. In both cases
there is joy in recognizing elegant simplicity through economy of means.’

John Adams is a modern classical composer, originally part of the minimalist school, but always
with an undercurrent of humor. When his Grand Pianola Music was first played, many hated
it. Adams says: ‘The concept of entertaining your listener was verboten in the modernist period. Any
entertainment had to be brutally ironic.Which Grand Pianola Music is not. Its humor is quintessentially
American…’ He goes on: ‘One of the dissatisfactions I had with modernism was its coldness. The
expression of deep feelings was being co-opted by pop music. Music that touched you the way
Beethoven or Bach did, or Wagner, Sibelius, Debussy—all that soul [in modernism] was being taken
over by John Coltrane and the Beatles and Janis Joplin and Otis Redding.’

Adams’ quotes are included in Larry Rothe’s liner notes from the Grand Pianola Music CD.
That’s where I discovered that Adams’ later piece, Absolute Jest, also on the CD, was based on
Beethoven’s scherzos, or jokes. Beethoven included scherzos in his heavier stuff, to give his
audience a break of sorts.Adams again: ‘To Beethoven, a scherzo is this inspired sense of movement
and happiness. I wanted my work to be invested with that happiness.’ Yesss.

The critic and author Kenneth Clark had similar opinions to Adams’ about the rigidity of
modernism—in Clark’s case it was about abstract art. Here’s what he said: ‘Abstract art, in
                                                                                   INFLUENCES 23



anything like a pure form, has the fatal defect of purity. Without a pinch of earth the artist soon
contracts spiritual beriberi [a nasty disease] and dies of exhaustion.’ By ‘pinch of earth’ he meant
a connection with landscape, atmosphere, and humanity. Some people considered Clark an
old fuddy-duddy, but he tirelessly promoted contemporary English artists. And he thought
about the audience for his books. His TV series Civilization, used straightforward, jargon-free
language, so non-specialist readers and viewers could easily understand his points.

Another move away from long-held artistic ‘rules’ occurred around the idea that Greek and
Roman sculptures were intended to be pure, undecorated white marble forms at the time
they were made. When researchers discovered that some statues had been gaudily painted,
and others naturalistically colored to make them look lifelike, purists insisted on clinging to the
Renaissance-era myth that they had been totally white from the start. Examining microscopic
scraps of paint in the sculpture’s crevices, researchers proved the opposite was the case. But
the idea that pure, cold, white sculpture should be defiled with bright color—oh, the horrors!

Less of a fuss was made about coloring the Temple of Dendur in the Metropolitan Museum of
Art, New York, where it sits in serene beigeness. Instead of making replicas of the original, and
then painting them—as was done with the Greek and Roman statues to show what they had
originally looked like—the Met projected colors onto some of the actual low-relief images
carved into the temple’s walls, for a temporary exhibition in 2016–7. No one complained.

So…great uncle George’s map; a children’s atlas; English radio and television silliness; a satirical
magazine; sequential photographs; a genial typeface; an American advertisement; space and
simplicity in jazz; a revolt from the rules of musical and artistic modernism—I realize that
some of my silly influences might not seem like good examples to follow when trying to
explain things clearly. But just because a graphic is presented in a serious manner, does
that automatically make it authoritative? And the opposite of that: just because a graphic is
lighthearted, does that mean it’s not authoritative? How many of us learn more about the
serious news of the day from funny, satirical late-night TV news shows, than we do from
network newscasts, or from newspapers, or from all-day pecking at our smart phones, rabbit-
holing down the web? One of the best satirical TV hosts is John Oliver, who calls his work
‘investigative comedy.’ We laugh watching his show, but we remember the facts.We laugh, then
we think.

As long as designers don’t overload infographics with so much extraneous stuff that the
meaning of the story is obscured, we shouldn’t be afraid to add a feeling of approachability and
humanity—even humor where appropriate—to our graphic toolboxes. Helping our audiences
to understand the meaning of information is the point, isn’t it? Rules be damned.

The next chapter is my selected history of infographics. Every one of the landmarks, from
cave painting to Isotype has influenced me. How could they not? History is the great teacher.
                                                                                                 25




                    Pictorial data through the ages



This is a personal timeline of influential infographic landmarks. Information designers use
elements of this list every day, whether consciously or not, and whole books have been
written about each of them; my comments here scratch the surface, but it’s sadly unsurprising
that no woman appears until Emma Willard in 1835. (It’s even sadder that we assume it was
only men who painted in caves.) As with most other artistic and scientific work, history is not
herstory. But read on—we make up for the omission in the 21st century.

                   45,000 to 16,000 years ago It all starts here.




I know it’s a cliché to say that cave painters were the first infographic artists, but I’ll say it
again. We shouldn’t be afraid of using clichés, even though a standard dictionary definition is
‘a trite phrase, and the idea expressed by it; something that has become overly familiar or
commonplace.’ In my dictionary, the definition of cliché is ‘obvious truth.’

I digress. What were the cave artists doing 40,000 years ago? They were showing, counting,
listing, teaching, storytelling. That’s a good description of infographics. Others have suggested
that cave paintings were a sort of proto-cinema—helped by the flickering light of hand-held
torches which seemed to animate the art—or that they were the first PowerPoint shows.

We speculate about why those painters drew and painted (and scratched) on the walls of
their caves. Was there a spiritual connection? Art for art’s sake? A pastime in cold winters?
Target practice? (There are pock-marks on some of the images.) Animal identification? A way
to honor animals seen and hunted? Why are many of the images painted on top of others?

Lots of questions.The why may be difficult, but there is no speculation about what they painted.
It’s all there in front of you. The earliest figurative art found so far—in 2017, but only published
26 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



in 2021—is in the Leang Tedongnge Cave, on the island of Sulawesi. It’s
a picture of a warty pig (right), dated to be about 45,500 years old.
Other recent discoveries in Indonesia include a picture of a wild bull
dated at 44,000 years old, found in a cave in Borneo. In the Cave of
Maltravieso, in Spain, ‘stenciled’ handprints have been dated to 66,700 years ago. Like many
such handprints found in old caves, these are more ‘I was here’ than art. Much older abstract
markings have been found, notably in the Blombos Cave near Capetown, South Africa. These
date from 75,000 to 100,000 years old. I’m interested in representational art; things that could
be recognized as life outside the cave.

The paintings and drawings in the Chauvet and Lascaux caves were sometimes fully rendered
and colored images, but just as often they were simple, flat silhouettes of horses, bison, big
cats, (and a few humans).The artists drew only the essential details of their subjects, and that’s
what today’s infographic illustrators do too, many thousands of years later. The reason for
this, both then and now, is simple: showing the essential details of anything will convey your
idea most efficiently. Cave art was not art for art’s sake—for aesthetic appeal—it was the
first graphic messaging. It wasn’t interior decoration. After all, why paint on top of an existing
image, spoiling it, instead of finding another stretch of blank wall or ceiling? Repetition was the
painters’ way to underline the original message on the wall—to emphasize it, to teach it again.
And again, and again, and again to some 20,000 years of ‘students,’ 800 generations.




No one knows the mindset of these early artists, but I’d love to have a chat with them, if
only to let them know how influential their work is today. It’s humbling to look back and see
that the simple, silhouetted animal drawings by early humans are strikingly similar to today’s
graphic icons of horses or on signs showing us where to see bison and big cats at the zoo.

                              5,000 years ago Line ’em up




Egyptian wall paintings were often designed to create a pleasant life after death, and were
studied millenniums later by Neurath (see below, and later), who used the convention of lining
                                                                                    HISTORY 27



up figures in a neat, countable formation in his work. Today, the same stylized view of people
with heads in profile and bodies straight on—you know: ‘Walk like an Egyptian’—is used for
pedestrian crossing signs because this physically awkward arrangement of body parts actually
shows the most instantly recognizable figure of a walking person. (See traffic light signage.)

                                      c. 150 Map man




Ptolemy’s Geographia laid down the basic rules of mapmaking. Despite a big mistake (oops,
the Earth is the center of the universe), this work was the cartographic standard for the next
1,000 years. Ptolemy advanced the idea that maps could include climate, population density
and birth rates. He saw maps as vehicles for information beyond literal geography.

In Pictorial Maps, I included a line about Mrs Ptolemy making a mean Greek salad, but my editor
didn’t think it was funny. Today, funny wouldn’t come into it, I’d be censored for being sexist.

                                    1066 Narrative art




The Bayeaux Tapestry (by the way, it’s an embroidery not a tapestry) tells the story of
the Norman conquest of England in a continuous band of sequential pictures. Is this the first
comic strip? It’s certainly a big one: 225ft (69m) long, and a bit under 2ft (0.6m) wide—a
complete story in words and pictures.

The year 1066 is seared into the minds of many English schoolchildren as a result of reading
1066 And All That (A Memorable History of England, comprising all the parts you can remember,
including 103 Good Things, 5 Bad Kings and 2 Genuine Dates) when we were supposed to be
studying proper history textbooks. It’s a hilarious satire first published in 1930 by W.C. Sellar
and R.J. Yeatman. When history reaches the Crimean War, Florence Nightingale is referred to
as Florence Nightingown, Flora MacNightshade, and Flora MacNightlight (the Lady with the Deadly
Lampshade). Like good satire, the facts are all there, embedded in the fun.
28 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                 1480s Renaissance genius




Leonardo da Vinci drew things for himself in order to properly understand them. He made
beautiful drawings and paintings, of course, but also charts, diagrams, pictorial maps, and
anatomical cutaways—some of which he imagined, rather than directly observing them. He’s
the consummate infographics artist.

When I was 13, a beloved aunt (not Larry David’s beloved ‘aunt,’ in the funniest episode of Curb
Your Enthusiasm!) gave me a book of Leonardo’s Drawings, and two volumes of his Notebooks.
At the time, I gazed at the drawings, and ignored the texty notebooks. Later, when I was
preparing a lecture that included a section about an enormous (modern) statue of a horse
based on Leonardo’s drawings, I looked up his notes on how to transfer the measurements
of a life-sized clay sculpture of a horse to a block of marble for carving the finished piece, and
also how much the final sculpture would cost, in ducats.

But I was immediately distracted by all sorts of other stuff: a cure for seasickness (the sap of
wormwood); that a dead man will float in water on his back, while a dead woman will float
face down; how to save yourself in the sea after a shipwreck (wear a coat made out of two
layers of leather that are ‘quite airtight.’ Blow into the coat to inflate it and you’ll float); and
one piece of advice that I use all the time: ‘[study] as soon as you are awake or before you go
to sleep in bed in the dark.’ The ‘dark’ is his important point here, it allows your imagination
to see what you have been working on in the light.

                                 1658 Picturing the world




The Czech Jan Amos Comenius’ textbook of visual aids for children, Orbis Sensualium Pictus
(The Visible World in Pictures), was the first pictorial encyclopedia, and was printed in German
and other European languages, not just Latin, like most educational books of the time. One
part of it taught children the alphabet by mimicking animal sounds. Critics thought the realism
of the pictures sometimes defeated its purpose. Hmmm, I’ve heard criticism like that before.
                                                                                         HISTORY 29



                                        1630s Axis guy




René Descartes’ analytic geometry showed that two numbers could describe the position
of a point on a surface by using two lines (the x axis and y axis, or coordinates) with scales and
numbers on them. This is the Cartesian grid, the basis of the way we plot charts and graphs
today. To this day, I have to think twice about which is the Y and which the X; I wish they were
V and H, for Vertical and Horizontal. I’ll try to remember that X is a cross (across).

                                1780s The first chartmaker




William Playfair invented the bar chart (1786), the line graph (1786), and the pie chart
(1805). He insisted that his charts were pictures of numbers, not the numbers themselves.
Instead of looking at a table of numbers, people would more easily remember them if they
were presented as visual shapes—lines, bars, and pies. If they wanted the actual numbers,
readers could consult the data he used to make the charts. In his 1786 book, The Commercial
and Political Atlas, Playfair on bar charts: ‘Suppose the money received by a man in trade were all in
guineas, and that every evening he made a single pile of all the guineas received during the day, each
pile would represent a day, and its height would be proportioned to the receipts of that day; so that
by this plain operation, time, proportion, and amount, would all be physically combined.’

The guinea was a silver coin in circula-
tion at the time, and was worth about
$4.20. After 1814, the last year the coin
was minted, ‘guinea’ referred to a sum
of one pound and one shilling, or about
$1.40 today. (The word lives on: The
1,000 and 2,000 Guineas are names
of horse races in England and Ireland.)
Playfair systematized commercial data in
order to help his readers understand it.
He transformed numbers into ‘pictures.’
30 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                               1835 History in perspective




The educational reformer Emma Willard made chronographers (her name for illustrated
timelines of history) often using perspective to show the passage of time—the further away
from the front of the graphic, the older the date. In her Picture of Nations, or Perspective Sketch
of the Course of Empire (1835), a neat little box of type explained that ‘events apparently diminish
when viewed through the vista of departed years…applying the principle to a practical purpose
we have here brought before the eye, at once glance a sketch of the whole complicated subject of
Universal History.’

Perspective gave Willard a way to present recent events and dates larger and in more detail
in the foreground of her graphics. Her amazingly intricate chronographers invited the reader to
compare dates, (indeed whole periods of history), religions, rulers, and wars in one country to
others that were geographically distant.

                                 1858 Graphic trailblazer




In 1858, Florence Nightingale—the ‘Lady with the Lamp’—made a chart that some called
a rose diagram, or polar area chart (although she preferred to call the slices of her chart
‘wedges’) to show seasonal causes of death before and after improved sanitation at the
Barrack Hospital in Scutari, Istanbul, during the Crimean War, where she had volunteered to
serve.

Nightingale was the founder of modern nursing. Her famous graphic persuaded British medical
and military bigwigs to take notice of the lack of sanitation at the Scutari hospital. She could
just as well have made a conventional bar chart from the data, but her unusual chart form
made people see the problems. Her efforts eventually led to government passage of public
health measures.
                                                                                      HISTORY 31



                                        1920s Isotype




Austrian social scientist Otto Neurath and Marie Reidemeister (later Otto’s wife)
together with Gerd Arntz and other artists, collaborated on what has become a standard
method of showing data pictorially. Neurath called his method Isotype (International System of
Typographic Picture Education). He insisted on ‘statistical accountability’ meaning that his team’s
work wasn’t just an illustration with abstract bars attached to it; instead, the bars themselves
in Isotype charts consisted of icons lined up in rows that represented the quantity of a
commodity that could be counted—they were tiny pictures of whatever commodity was being
charted—so you instantly knew what the graphic was about. Although Neurath famously
said ‘words divide, pictures unite, he did not think that Isotype constituted a complete visual
language that could communicate everything by itself. Instead, he called his method a ‘helping’
language, one that perfectly married just the right amount of words with Arntz’s beautifully
drawn icons. Marie Neurath (1898-1986), continued her husband’s infographic work after his
death in 1945, primarily making informational books for children.

Otto and the surprisingly large number of others using his unit chart system (notably Rudolf
Modley, who had worked with Neurath in Austria in the 1930s) are enjoying well-deserved,
if somewhat late, recognition for their importance in making infographics accessible and un-
derstandable by all—the definition of joyful infographics! If I had to name one graphic hero, it
would be Neurath (with Arntz a close second).




  The young Otto Neurath …           … Marie Reidemeister …                 … and Gerd Arntz
32 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                     1926 Mechanical Anatomy




Working at the same time as Neurath, the German gynecologist Fritz Kahn art directed
graphics that explained the workings of the human body as though they were machines. His
most famous diagram, drawn by Fritz Schüler, was Man as an Industrial Palace, and it’s just that:
an almost life-sized cutaway of the human body, filled with pictorial metaphors for its basic
systems: digestion, blood and air circulation, and nerves.

The work of these two pioneers, Neurath and Kahn—who apparently never met, and who
both had to flee the Nazis—crossed language barriers in an effort to educate people in an
approachable way. In 1943, Neurath said: ‘One of our first principles was to make even the smallest
chart as good, as original, and as charming as possible.’

                                     1933 The map as diagram




Harry Beck’s diagram of the London Underground is the father of almost every transit
map in the world. An engineering draughtsman working for a division of the Underground
system, Beck drew a map that used one scale to show the large distances covered by trains
in the suburbs, and a different scale to show the much busier, smaller central area of the city.
Although not strictly a pictorial infographic, I’ve included Harry’s abstract diagram-map in this
list of influential landmarks because it embodies the idea of joyful infographics: beautiful, clear
communication designed in an approachable way.

The graphic directly addresses its intended audience, ignoring above-ground geography and
concentrating on the subway rider’s essential question: what’s the next station? It is many
designers’ favorite information graphic and has stood the test of time, with newly constructed
lines periodically added to Harry’s original map of six.* It was ground-breaking. (Pun intended.)
* To coincide with the Queen of England’s Platinum Jubilee, Transport for London (TfL) issued a new map in May
2022 that included the new Elizabeth Line. It was met with dismay by mapmakers. Cartographer Ken Field says: ‘The
network has become so crowded. It’s questionable whether Beck would have employed the same design philosopy had he
wrestled with the current layout and requirements. The map now needs a redesign from first principles.’
                                                                                  HISTORY 33



1940s and 50s Two magazines, two infographic giants




Fortune and Time had infographic artists on staff, and they published ground-breaking maps
and diagrams. Richard Edes Harrison’s Look at the World, The Fortune Atlas for World Strategy
(1944) includes maps drawn from unorthodox points of view: His Europe viewed from the
East, or Japan from Siberia did not show landmasses the way we were used to seeing them in
conventional atlases. They made you look and think anew. Often they were how the enemy
viewed the US and Western Europe during WW2. Among other cartographic conventions,
Harrison jettisoned the notion that North had to be at the top of the map.

Time’s principal mapmaker, Robert M. Chapin Jr, did more straightforward cartography, but
he wasn’t shy about integrating pictorial elements to his maps—such as a realistically-drawn
fist punching forward to show advancing troop movements. But his illustration never got in
the way of accuracy. Indeed, his maps were used by the US government during the war.

When I arrived at Time, 35 years later, I found the archives of every map and chart that had
appeared in the magazine since the 1920s. Chapin’s maps with their bold metaphors gave me
a kind of license to go back to more illustrative graphics than the straightforward approach
the magazine had adopted during the 1950s. In this I was mentored and
championed by the person who hired me to work at Time, the
Art Director Walter Bernard, who had just redesigned it. Just for
fun, I made myself a laminated, official-looking Artistic License,
which allowed me, well, artistic license.

                                1990s to now Big data




At the end of the 20th century, I watched infographics veer from over-produced 3-d renderings,
made possible by new computer programs, to cold, stripped-down minimalism. As our
34 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



machines got faster and more sophisticated, we started to call some of what we did Data
Visualization. Infographics are data visualization, of course—both fields make data visible—
but the computer-driven ‘dataviz’ world is different from the originally analog, more pictorial
world of infographics. In sum, data visualizations present data. Infographics explain data. That’s
a big difference.

It sounds as though I’m dismissing data visualization in favor of an approach to making
information understandable by making it more pictorial. Here’s where I gladly acknowledge
the attribute of data visualization that’s not attainable in print: interactivity, on the web. I’m
no expert on this—being principally a designer for print—but I know that the ability to
handle large datasets, with instantly clickable details, represents a leap forward for the field.
Interactivity can present a complex story, and let people decide for themselves which parts
they want to explore. Readers are freed from static print when they become users on the web;
they can manipulate and customize the data to see themselves in it.

But one thing is clear to me: if a data visualization is without context, or approachability, or
apparent meaning, it loses value. A parade of numbers is just that, especially if the audience
lacks knowledge of the subject. That audience needs stories.

When a designer can simply choose a particular type of chart from hundreds of different types
and apply it to a dataset, digital engineers have removed human thinking.Yes, it means that data
visualizers can now deal with huge bundles of numbers, but somehow in that process, helpful,
reader-friendly, representational images are exiled. It’s easy to let the computer think for
you—it’s seductive—and it is harder to draw recognizable things instead of letting a program
draw elegant, abstract swooping lines for you.

Many data visualizers would like what they do to be considered a branch of science. They
want their work to be, or appear to be, scientific, because that suggests authority. (The cynic
on my shoulder whispers that if you call yourself an authority, you can charge more for what
you do.) I think that infographic artists and designers, as well as strict data visualizers, should
approach scientific and other subjects from their own viewpoint, more straightforwardly, as an
outside reporter. And while the subject may be serious, the approach to it can take a lighter,
less cold and analytic, turn.

At the very least, let’s ditch jargon—that special exclusionary language that every profession
uses to keep a wall around their private club. Part of the job of the joyful infografista is to use
clear, jargon-free explanations.

Some of the smartest designers of data visualizations work for newspapers (and their websites)
around the world. I have great admiration for the work they do, and having been a weekly
deadline jockey myself, I understand the pressures they are under to do it on a daily basis.
                                                                                     HISTORY 35



Their ability to find, then sort through, and then select the most appropriate form in which
to display the data, is justly celebrated. The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Financial
Times,The Guardian, and The South China Morning Post, to mention just a few, kept us splendidly
up-to-date and informed throughout the data-heavy Covid 19 pandemic.

As noted at the start of this history, infographics in the past have been dominated by men. In
the 21st century, there’s a cohort of women making joyful infographics.And they are not afraid
to ditch the computer and use their hands. (Now that really is digital!)

Here are just a few:

Megan Jaegerman did largely pictorial, black and white charts for The New York Times from
1990 to 1998, and she gave the ‘old gray lady’ a delightfully lighter touch.

Stephanie Posavec and Giorgia Lupi wrote a postcard to each other across the Atlantic
for 52 weeks, hand-charting their personal lives in intricate detail. Their project, Dear Data, is
now housed in the Museum of Modern Art.

Separately, Stephanie, this time with a different collaborator, Miriam Quick, has produced
a terrific children’s book (see it in the science chapter). And Giorgia, a partner at the design
firm Pentagram, has created several data visualization projects that emphasize people first and
data later, urging us all to ‘speak data’ along with whatever other language we speak.

Eleanor Lutz is a graphics editor at The New York Times. Her elegant and clever science
diagrams make you want to immediately read and study them. Mona Chalabi is a passionate
illustrator, data journalist and producer, whose writing
and art has appeared in the New Yorker, Five Thirty Eight,
The Guardian, and The New York Times.

Paula Scher, another partner at Pentagram, is not
known as an information designer, but her huge,
intricately hand-drawn and painted maps suggest she
might be one at heart. Her maps certainly suggest a
new direction for cartography. A simplified version
of Paula’s map of Africa can be seen on supermarket
shelves (right); it’s part of the packaging for Fonio, an
ancient West African grain, and it’s a perfect, friendly
infographic for this book: the maker’s name, Yolélé,
means ‘let the good times roll.’

Next: Nine ways to make your infographics joyful.
                                                                                              37




           Nine ways to make your graphics joyful



      Know Your Audience

You can’t make joyful infographics, or any useful infographics, if you don’t know your audience.
I mean the audience for the particular job you are working on. I do believe that everyone—
including those with specialist knowledge of their subject—can benefit from a friendly graphic
helping hand, but you shouldn’t talk down to scientists, for example, by over-simplifying their
work. When you are explaining scientific concepts to non-scientists—that’s different. In both
cases, making the information clear is the goal. By the way, I much prefer the word clarifying to
simplifying. More to come on that, later.

So, ask questions about your audience.

First, the obvious one: who is this job for? Adults? Teenagers? People who really know their
subject (i.e., those scientists)? Just women? Mostly men? Children, before they can read? Do
you think who’s reading makes a difference? It does.

Do some in your audience not speak English? (Or a language that’s not the one you
are using.) Wouldn’t you like to reach that part of your readership? Recently, for a pamphlet
I designed to explain food scrap recycling, the project organizers knew that many people in
the community were Hispanic. They wondered if I would make a version with the text in
Spanish? Of course! It was both a practical and a friendly thing to do. And it didn’t take long.
But designers beware: Spanish runs longer than English!

What about blind people?There are Braille keyboards, and web-based voiced descriptions—
similar to spoken subtitles on streamed movies and TV shows. Screen readers can translate
text for users (your web pages must be specifically designed to make use of them). Tactile,
Braille-like graphics are good for understanding spatial relationships within data, but they are
very expensive to produce. In 1837, a beautiful Atlas of the United States Printed for the Use of
the Blind was produced in an edition of 50 copies with embossed maps and text. There’s a
copy in the David Rumsey Map Collection—see it online. Braille itself was invented in 1825,
but the system wasn’t used in the Atlas because it hadn’t been universally adopted at that time.
38 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                           And those who have Color Vision Disability? (It’s usually referred
                           to as color blindness, but that term does not accurately describe
                           the problem.) The most common difficulty for the 350 million
                           people worldwide with CVD is seeing the difference between red
                           and green. The chart on the left shows what some colors look like
                           if you have CVD.

                           Despite what might seem like inconveniences for designers, we all
                           should make the effort to create graphics that are accessible to
                           as many people as possible. The effort is nothing compared to the
                           inconvenience of the sufferers. Think of it like this: paying attention
                           to the needs of your audience is similar to being sensitive about
                           guests’ food allergies; in fact, perhaps guests is a better word than
                           audience. Imagine that you are having a data conversation with
your guest readers, and that some of them cannot understand you. Organizations currently
engaged in further research into accessibility for everyone, not just the visually impaired are
listed at the back of the book.

Two things about the whole subject of the audience.We have to be realistic. First, we may not
know exactly who our guests are, and second, not knowing who they are might mean that
we play safe and by making things too simple and straightforward. But remember that many
of us pretend to know more about a subject than we really do. We nod approvingly during a
conversation so as not to admit ignorance, letting on that we are ill-equipped to be part of
the conversation. Few of us say ‘I don’t know.’

If our guest audience doesn’t understand us, it’s not their fault; it’s our graphic. Making things
clear is not the same as treating readers like children, who understand much more than we
give them credit for, anyway. If they don’t understand—from about age four—they can look
up anything they want on the web. Does that argue that we don’t have to pay any attention
to who is reading our stuff? No, that is not the point of joyful infographics! The point is to
engage our audience (readers, users, viewers, guests) so that they don’t have to puzzle it out.

       Visual Prosody

Prosody is the pattern of stress and intonation in language—inflection. I didn’t know what
prosody meant, either, but I thought it would be OK to have a word in the book that I had
to look up. Prosody is what makes reading and listening to words enjoyable, and holds many
keys to understanding what someone is saying. Does the sound of a spoken sentence go up a
little at the end? In print, there’s a question mark to let you know you are posing a question.
In speech, it’s that little upward lilt. By extension, visual prosody is how you say something
visually—how you present data. Visual prosody is really what this book is all about. It seems
                                                                                NINE WAYS 39



obvious to say that the way you express data visually can make an infographic joyful—or awful.
But obvious is good. Let’s see: take a paragraph about a set of numbers; list the numbers; then
arrange them into a table; then chart the numbers; then do something with the chart. It’s all
the same information, told in different forms.

Visual prosody in action: 8 ways to ‘say’ the data
40 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



You say tomayto, and I say tomarto.
Years ago, I picked up this card in an old
schoolhouse-turned-restaurant in Montana. It
took me a little time to understand that the
name, when spoken out loud, was ‘Caffay,’ and
not ‘Carfay,’ which is the way I am used to
pronouncing ‘calf.’ The almost non-design of the
card was exactly right for this tiny, out-of-the-way place,
with its minimal map and directions at the top, and the punny name. Perfect prosody! If you
play ‘I Spy’ towns that have the same name as computer companies (a strange game, to be
sure!), head up to Dell, Montana.*

        Context, Comparisons and Connections

                      Everything can be understood better when you see it next to something
                      you already know or understand. If you upend the Queen Mary 2 ocean liner
                      and stand her next to the Empire State Building in New York, you see how
                      big the ship is. (And if you are a pasenger you can see the building as you
                      pull into the dock.)

                                           How do other countries
                                           (and the moon)
                                           measure up
                                           to the US?




                     Here’s the same
                      map of the US
                    compared to the
                  continent of Africa.

* I called one of the current owners of the Calf-A, Shanna Lamb, who, with her husband EJ, bought it in April 2021.
It’s now called the Old Schoolhouse Café, and is open from 8am to 3pm, and closed on Wednesday and Thursday.
                                                                                 NINE WAYS 41



Illustrator Peter Grundy compared the size of Nelson’s Column in London to the great
Admiral’s ship Victory, and included a double-decker bus and the nuclear-powered submarine
Dreadnought, perfectly fitting them all into a stamp commissioned by Royal Mail to
commemorate the 1805 Battle of Trafalgar, (below).




Nelson’s Column in Trafalgar Square also appears in this old postcard, (right)—compared to
the original Queen Mary. New contexts, better understanding.

Noticing an unexpected connection between two people is a good exercise in understanding
the power of context. For example, the satirist Jonathan Swift was living in Dublin, Ireland,
at the time that Frederick Handel was composing Messiah. Dublin, a relatively small city, was
a center of music and the arts in the mid-1700s, so it’s likely that Swift and Handel met,
especially since Swift, who was Dean of St. Patrick’s Cathedral at the time, did not want his
two cathedral choirs to be part of the first public performance of Messiah. That took place in
a musick hall, which to Swift was a profane place. I’m imagining the lively conversation between
the acerbic satirist and the ex-pat with a heavy German accent.

And those two guys mentioned as influences in chapter one? Eadweard Muybridge and the
slightly older Edward Lear were alive at the same time. Before Muybridge emigrated to the US,
I’d like to think that he and Lear sat in a London coffee house in 1852 discussing Dickens’ new
novel Bleak House or Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin which were both published
that year. Or, a year later, arguing for or against compulsory smallpox vaccination in Britain.
Lear could also boast about the private drawing lessons he gave to the 27-year-old Queen
Victoria. Someone should make a movie. (Edward and Eadweard?)

If you let your mind wander away from the literal to the possible, all sorts of connections
pop up, and that’ll make your graphics interestingly different. Brian Haynes, the art director
who gave me great uncle George’s boat drawings as reference for a job, used this principle in
his magazine design: he included everything that interested him about the subject at hand; he
made connections and comparisons, with quotes, illustrations, photos, charts, and maps.
42 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Information graphic designers are often taught to strip out any fun for the sake of clarity, or
because critics say they are obscuring the message with unnecessary bits and pieces. But if a
connection or a comparison throws extra light on the subject, I’m with Brian: include it!

It’s the same with my favorite TV shows: Seinfeld, Curb Your Enthusiasm,Ted Lasso. The seemingly
obscure references in the scripts of these shows come at you so quickly that unless you
rewind and look and listen again, you’ll miss them. It’s the richness of their inclusion that
makes viewing so pleasurable. I know, I know, TV sitcoms are meant to be entertaining—and
that isn’t the point of infographics. But including a level of meaning and interest, beneath the
main message, is a good example to follow. Both TV sitcoms and information graphics have to
strike a balance between fun and a clear storyline.

Most people are mixed up about big numbers.
Politicians and pundits don’t help; they throw numbers around without context or explanation.
A billion-dollar budget—that’s big. A trillion? Well, it’s bigger, but how much bigger? Just saying
a thousand times bigger is not helpful. Show it!

We’ll start with a smaller number: how ‘big’ is a million dollars? It will fit into the kind of bag
you are allowed to carry onto a plane. A billion dollars? You’ll need an 8.5ft cube, 615 square




feet—basically a cupboard—to contain it (again, in $100 bills). And for a trillion dollars? The
space needed to house that pile of money in $100 bills is 384,000 square feet. Here’s where
finding a relatable context for your audience is important. You can’t compare that much to
an everyday thing like a suitcase or a cupboard. Let’s say you are giving a talk in New York;
384,000 square feet is the size of the main hall at Grand Central Terminal, (top right).This will
give most New Yorkers a context from their own city. If your speech is in Washington DC, a
trillion dollars in $100 bills would go a third of the way up the Washington Monument. The
DC audience (and a lot of tourists) would then have a good mental picture.
                                                                                      NINE WAYS 43




Why do we visualize a government budget as one big lump? What’s the point, apart from
WOW! The US budget’s billions are split into smaller sums that come back to us in the form
of childcare, Medicare, education, pensions, roads, bridges, and battleships. Although still huge,
those smaller numbers are more relevant to our everyday life. Yet graphic comparisons are
often made to the overall amount.Why? Because it gets immediate attention; those important
details can wait, we will show them after grabbing our audience. Joyful Infographics start out
as the big picture, an introduction to the small print, which itself comes later.

Bringing data down to a human scale, indeed using the human body itself in some way, makes
for a good relatable context when explaining facts. After all, we know our bodies, we carry
them around with us. All we really know about the Empire State Building, or the Eiffel Tower,
is that they are tall landmarks that we may or may not have seen, or know much about at all.

                                                               For a Radio Times feature
                                                               about the future of really
                                                               long-distance space
                                                               travel, I tried to help
                                                               readers visualize
                                                               immense distances, (left).

                                                               The light from our sun
                                                               takes eight minutes to
                                                               reach us. Light from the
                                                               nearest star takes
                                                               four and a half years.
44 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Anatomical mnemonics—your body as context—easy ways to remember stuff.
I found these on the web in various styles, uncredited. Here they are redrawn for consistency.
                                                                                   NINE WAYS 45




Straightforward comparisons of size help visualize large quantities.
Above, all the stuff recycled by Middlebury College. (Art Director: Pamela Fogg)
46 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



The whales are nice, but you don’t have to force every comparison to be with something you
can visualize. For our 2019 book Mortality—basically a collection of infographics—Richard
Saul Wurman and I needed to show a lot of data, but we wanted to be sure that each set of
numbers had an anchoring context. What’s the murder rate in the US? We compared it to
the rate in England and Wales. (Both graph lines, (below), represented homicides per 100,000
people per year, so the difference in population was eliminated.) It’s an example of a difficult
subject treated with restraint. That line crawling across the bottom of the chart gave us in
America a clear view of our problem—a context for those deadly numbers at the top.




How many people died in World War II? The numbers are even more horrifying when you see
them next to other modern wars, (below). You probably didn’t know those numbers in detail,
but shown like this they give meaning to each other—in other words, a context.
                                                                                     NINE WAYS 47



Charts about death can hardly be called joyful, but even deadly subjects should be approachable
for the audience.You don’t need to shock readers with dead bodies. Leaving out such obvious
images doesn’t sanitize the data, or make the subject more palatable. Let context—additional
data— do the work of helping readers understand the numbers.

Do I have to draw you a picture?
You can suggest a context without using a graphic at all. In July 2021, a tiny silverpoint drawing
sold at auction for a huge sum. Just how tiny was the drawing? The New York Times headline
put it perfectly: ‘A Leonardo da Vinci the size of a Post-it sells for $12.2 million.’ (See earlier,
that’s 12 carry-on bags!)

Or here’s Gail Collins, writing about robocalls in the same newspaper, and giving a nice human
context ‘[there were] an estimated 45.9 billion robocalls in 2020. That’s about 1,455 a second.
In the time it takes you to blink, 1,455 people are being robo-ed.’

In a demonstration to show how much toothpaste is used every day by people in the US, I
rolled out a thin strip of black paper on the floor across the stage in front of me. I squeezed
out a long white line of toothpaste onto it. One end of the line represented Los Angeles,
the other, New York. The point was that this length of toothpaste was the daily amount
of toothpaste used in the US. (I estimated the amount, 2,450 miles, based on a sample of
colleagues’ bathroom habits.) But after doing this elaborate performance a few times, I
realized that I didn’t need to be so theatrical. Instead, I asked the audience to close their eyes,
imagine a map of America, color it black, and then ‘draw’ a white line across it from coast to
coast. That’s a visual of the amount of toothpaste used every day in the US. It was right there
in their minds’ eye—no graphic was needed.

When we don’t think about our readers, we miss a chance to help them by putting facts
into an understandable context. The Heritage Foundation maintains a database of mail-in
voting numbers and found that fraud in the two decades of elections before 2020 ‘was about
0.00006% of total votes cast.’ Although that’s clearly very small, it’s not a friendly number.
I wonder if it would it have made the slightest difference to anyone’s understanding if the
number quoted had been 0.0006%? (Look closely.) About 250 million mail-in votes were cast
during the 20 years from 2000 to 2019, while the number of people who voted illegally in that
period was just over 1,200. Isn’t 1,200 votes a more graspable, human number than 0.00006%?
All those zeroes tell you that voter fraud is very rare.When you state the number as it relates
to living people, you can see it’s a really, really rare.

Using relatable context is not only a concept that fosters understanding within an infographic,
it’s also useful to think about where the graphic appears—when the context itself is surprising.
This can be as simple as making your graphic look like a comic strip—with speech balloons
instead of text blocks—and running it in a conventionally laid out magazine or paper. An
48 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



unusual context—the out-of-context context as it were—is what makes the information
visible. For instance, in presentations, I’ve tried to demonstrate how far world-class athletes
can jump. Hotel conference rooms aren’t the usual context for the long jump. First, I measure
29+ feet on the floor in front of the audience, then step back, make a short run-up and jump…
about 7 feet! Embarrassed, I walk to the marker at the other end of the measured 29 feet to
reveal the athletes’ feat. Their feet didn’t touch the ground on the way there from the take off
board. Spectators at the Olympics expect jumpers to do amazing things, but indoors, in the
confines of a conference room, you can really experience how far a superhuman can jump.

Here are more examples of visual context.




For the Radio Times, this
graphic accompanied a
program listing about Brunel,
showing his amazing 19th
century engineering feats, in
scale to each other.




                   Another diagram for the
               program pages of the Radio
              Times, this one giving English
                   viewers a familiar height
               comparison for the Olympic
                  ski jump. (Jumpers didn’t
              wear helmets in 1972 at the
                          Sapporo Games.)
                                                                                            NINE WAYS 49




For Taschen’s Food and Drink Infographics, this is a simple comparison of the most
commonly eaten birds (and their eggs) all drawn to the same scale. (Keep the hunter
image in mind: he first appeared in a graphic about Lyme disease, included in the science
chapter. It’s OK to recycle your stuff!
50 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



In our book Mortality,
Richard Saul Wurman
and I tried two ways to
show the same info.

More people are afraid
of sharks than mosquitos
which the top graphic
seems to confirm—at
least graphically.

But far more people die
from mosquito-borne
malaria than from shark
attacks, and that fact is
more obvious in the lower
graphic. (We printed both
versions in the book.)
NINE WAYS 51
52 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



       Metaphor

Along with clichés, I’ve had an on-again, off-again affair with metaphors. Infographics have
their own built-in metaphors: pie charts, fever lines, table of figures, family trees. (I suppose
some families do plant a tree and call it a family tree, but you know what I mean.) Writers
use metaphors with a natural ease: ‘All the world’s a stage, and all the men and women merely
players’—Shakespeare in As You Like It. Or ‘You ain’t nothin’ but a hound dog’ famously sung by
Elvis Presley in 1956, but originally written by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller 4 years earlier for
‘Big Mama’ Thornton. (It made more sense sung by a woman.) I used to ask writers at Time
what they thought would make a good graphic for the article they were working on. When
they said ‘I don’t know, I’m a word person,’ I wondered what a word person might look like,
right?). But then they’ll say: ‘Well, it’s the tail wagging the dog.’ OK, I’ll try that.

Just in case you are not sure, a metaphor is a figure of speech
that’s not true in a literal way, but is an implied comparison.
You are an angel—metaphor. Metaphor’s cousin, simile, is
slightly different. You sing like an angel—that’s a simile. Similes
use like or as to draw comparisons.

Visual metaphors can come uncomfortably close to cliché—
yes, I know I said earlier that for me clichés are obvious truths.
At Time magazine I made a list of images that I hoped editors
would stop asking me to draw, because they were overdone.
Today, I avoid these ones in graphics: rainbows, roller coasters,
mountain ranges, Hokusai’s Wave, Grant Wood’s American
Gothic (I’ve used both in the past, but now I think they should
just be Art), mazes, horizons, precipices, ladders, the Monopoly
board, telescopes (for anything in the future), icebergs (as in
tip of; but oooh, do you see what’s underwater?), hourglasses
(time’s always running out), banana peels.

Some metaphors have eye-opening origins: when a renaissance aristocrat commissioned a
portrait, the artist would charge extra if an arm and a leg were visible in the finished painting.
Other metaphors have a straightforward background: that deadline we either fear or rely on
to get the job done; it was the perimeter around a prison, where inmates would be shot if
they went beyond it.

I suggest you use visual metaphors with care. If you draw a roller coaster to align exactly with
the points on a line chart, and title it A bumpy ride (I’ve done this, too), it’s a metaphor alright,
but it’s too obvious as a visual and verbal comparison. Instead, try to find a metaphor that
adds insight to the information, and isn’t just an illustration to make a chart look interesting.
                                                                                 NINE WAYS 53



As I mentioned in the history chapter, Robert Chapin’s maps for Time included drawn
metaphors. His preliminary sketch (below) for the ‘Body Blow’ WWII map, shows that he was
not only a cartographer, but also a fine draughtsman. Part of Chapin’s successful map is the
context in which it appears: a respected magazine article about a deadly war.
Here, context and metaphor work perfectly together.




I had cataract surgery in 2019. At a follow-up consultation, the doctor described cataracts in
a way I had not heard before. The lens in your eye floats inside something like a transparent
M&M (or a Smartie in England).The ‘chocolate’ inside this shell is what clouds your vision, and
that’s what the surgeon scrapes out, before inserting a new man-made lens. It was an effective,
and strangely comforting explanation.



                                                                     Actual size.
                                                                     (The purple one
                                                                     is a Smartie.)
54 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Rejecting the metaphor
Sometimes it’s good to think hard about whether an accepted metaphor is appropriate. The
newspaper USA Today asked a number of designers to rethink the official US Food Pyramid—
recommendations for how much of what foods you should eat to be healthy.




The original USDA pyramid, (above), was redesigned in 2005, (above, right), in an effort to make
it more personal. Unfortunately, the spiky figure climbing up the side of the pyramid gets a
shock on arrival at the top, since the six food groups have tapered to a point, leaving nothing
to eat at all. Also, the tapering contradicts the caption which says that the more exercise you
do, the more food you can eat. At least the original (black) graphic had suggested quantities,
and it showed the food groups distributed according to official dietary recommendations of
the time. It was this new diagram that spurred USA Today to ask designers for their ideas.

I started, as I always do, with mind-wandering sketches, including a thought about whether I
could construct a face like the famous paintings made out of fruit and vegetables by Giuseppe
Arcimboldo in the 16th century. But that seemed forced, so I quickly turned to diagramming
the recommended proportions of the major food groups, which were simple. I briefly tried to
                                                                keep a human in the picture,
                                                                (below), but gave that up, too.
                                                                                     NINE WAYS 55




I never considered reorganizing the pyramid, partly because it didn’t work
as a good metaphor, and partly because I felt there should be a complete
change to help people examine their diets afresh. My final design (above)
reflected the USDA recommended dietary proportions: vegetables, grains
and dairy all at 25%; 15% for fruit; 10% for meat. I made a small logo, too.

In 2010, five years after this appeared in USA Today, I was invited to join a group of nutritionists,
marketing experts, and infographic designers at a White House meeting to discuss a renewed
initiative to promote official dietary guidelines. (I was disappointed that the meeting didn’t
take place at the White House itself! It was across the street.) In 2011, the resulting icon was
announced. It was gratifying to see what the government’s designers came up with—MyPlate.




               On the following pages are more examples of visual metaphors.
56 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




What did I say about clichés? Oh, well! Here are three graphics that use the
same idea. The one above, for Attaché magazine, also uses the idea of a
‘Greek chorus’ of little people at the bottom, adding info to the graphic.
(More about this in Labelling, number seven in this chapter.)
            NINE WAYS 57




      Chapin’s maps-with-
      metaphors for Time
      magazine during
      WW2 always thrill
      me. Look at the way
      his metal clamp is so
      obviously ‘outside’ the
      map—as though it’s
      just been placed on
      top of the map after
      it was finished.




An uncomfortable
detail from a graphic
about household
incomes from
American History
magazine.
(Art Director Rudy
Hoglund.)
58 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Perhaps my favorite graphic
from Time magazine, from
1987, making the type go
exactly where I wanted it to,
and showing the ultimate in
political buck-passing, followed
by Reagan’s denial that he
knew anything.
                                                        NINE WAYS 59




In 1979, I made the costs of
medical care sit up in hospital
beds. An acceptable graphic
method today? I think so.
(Art director Walter Bernard.)




                         An Illustration for the New
                        Yorker about dissonance in
                         Dvorak’s music, composed
                       using the 12-tone scale. The
                        scowling face is made from
                       musical notation marks. I’ve
                            used that old engraving
                                 of ears a few times.
                       (Art director Owen Philllips.)
60 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



       Simplicity and Clarity

In lectures, I often show a slide with one word on it: ‘simplify.’ While I’m explaining that
simplifying information might be taken to mean dumbing it down, the word on the screen
morphs into ‘clarify.’

So, don’t simplify your graphics; instead, use them to clarify the information. Just semantics, you
say? It’s a fair point—when you clarify something, you may well be simplifying parts of it—but
I still don’t want people to mistake simplifying for dumbing down.

One way I have tried to clarify a difficult subject is by making a tiny pocket-able book about
it. The first one I did was The Smallest Ever Guide to the Internet (for busy people) for a meeting
of Fortune 500 CEOs, held in Barcelona, Spain. In 1996, many executives knew little about
the Internet, while they were overseeing employees who were using it every day. The idea of
the meeting was to allow the CEOs a ‘safe’ place, away from their offices, where they could
admit their ignorance and get hands-on training. My job was to tell them how the Internet
works. I knew that each attendee would be sitting behind a computer with their own personal
technician sitting right next to them, so I doubted that anyone would listen to me. At the start
of the lecture, each CEO was handed a copy of the book, (below, one spread, actual size).
                                                                                        NINE WAYS 61



I didn’t have the guts to hold up the book and say ‘Everything I’m about to tell you is in here, so I’ll
shut up and let you get back to your new friend, the computer,’ and then leave the podium.

Nobody listened to the talk. But the little book was very successful, because it was friendly,
and jargon-free, and the CEOs took it home with them. And because it was very small, it
somehow signaled that even if the subject was difficult, or new, this wasn’t going to be difficult
to understand. Between the 1996 meeting and 2002, I made seven editions of the Internet
book, updating it and printing a total of 15,000 copies.

More Smallest Guides followed, (below). Some were just for fun: Cocktails; Chocolate; Red Hat (a
wordless story about a drummer); Endangered Animals ABC. Others were serious: Life Sciences
for Juan Enriquez of Harvard University; Billion People Project, for Della van Heyst; Investments,
for Phillip Kasofsky and Michael Harvey.




Simplify your color
There was a time when color was expensive to print. Then, when it wasn’t, editors and
publishers thought everything should be in color: photos, graphics, headlines. Their rationale
went like this: One: We’re paying for it, so let’s use it. Two: The world is in color, why shouldn’t
your graphics be, too?

For infographics, the comeback answer is simple: color should never be decorative; never used
to make a page look better, or more ‘informational’. If you use color selectively it is a good way
to indicate why a certain part of your graphic is important. Color draws the reader’s attention:
the accident happened here. This data point is what you should consider. This is the part of
your brain that lights up when you are happy. There’s plenty of color in editorial photographs
and advertisements; simple, restricted color makes infographics stand out when seen in the
context of the whole publication.
62 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                                                           There was no color,
                                                                           just black and white,
                                                                           available on the page
                                                                           that this ran on.

                                                                           In 1984, Time and
                                                                           other media outlets in
                                                                           the US used red for
                                                                           Democrats and blue
                                                                           for Republicans, so
                                                                           these would have been
                                                                           little blue elephants.

                                                                           Red is still the color
                                                                           of left-leaning political
                                                                           parties in the rest of
                                                                           the world.




If no point in the graphic is more important than any other, black is a fine color all by itself.
In November 1984, I saw that there was a tiny elephant and a tiny donkey in the fonts that
Time used. This was before the art department produced layouts or created graphics with
computers. On election night, I asked the typesetter to prepare a stack of the two political
parties’ symbols, and be ready to assign the final number of electoral votes to each when they
were counted. The result was the first chart I made without any drawing or pasting up.

Same size
If you can show something at the size it is in real life,
you’ll be a long way to making it understandable. This
laminated business card, includes a life-size photo of an
insect that bores into trees on the front, with other info
on the back. The card speaks for itself. It’s simplicity in
action—that punched exit hole is perfect.
                                                                                 NINE WAYS 63



       Editing

Editing is a dirty word in some infographic circles. I don’t mean that you should angrily shout
EDITING! when you stub your toe, or when the computer crashes before you’ve saved some
work still in progress. A hearty #@*! is more fulfilling.

The anti-‘editing’ cohort says that when you edit, you are making a choice about what to
present. It’s the ‘just the facts’ argument about impartiality. I believe that most readers want
an edited version of whatever data is available. They are busy, and they don’t necessarily feel
the need to interact with the data and come to their own conclusions. The arguers come
back: doesn’t editing mean that you are selecting just the bits that you want to be seen? NO!!
It means that you are trimming off the parts that do not meaningfully contribute to a story.

Besides, all infographics have selections in them of one sort or another: where did the data
come from? Do you trust the source? Did you check with two other sources to see any
discrepancies? Which parts can be left out without distorting the story, or be seen to be
biased? (Or, not only seen, but be biased.) Both designers and their readers benefit from the
work of editors. Editing clarifies messages.

        Labelling

A powerful but underused way to help readers
understand your charts and maps and diagrams
is to place clear, readable labels directly onto the
image, not as numbered captions below it

                            Right, the back cover of a
                       medical guide to diagostic tests
                       that acted as a contents page.

Who wants to bob their head up and down from
a number on the chart or diagram to a caption
underneath or beside it? Some labels are just
labels: a simple list of what’s in the graphic, so
put the text next to what needs to be labelled.

Other labels are extra signals to alert the reader
to take note of a particular item in the graphic.
Look at your chart or diagram as though it’s
for the first time, and ask: what’s the meaning
of that unusual outlier—one that’s much higher
or much lower—in a series of numbers? Or: at
64 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



which data point did the story behind the data take a turn for the better, or worse? Or: what
was happening in the world to make that spike in numbers? And why? Tell us! Label it! These
labels are not part of the dataset, or research you are working with; rather, they are a separate
level of information, designed to help. Add a text box with an arrow pointing to where your
reader should pay attention. Yes, it’s messier, but you are thinking about the person reading
your work, not the design of it.

I often try to help readers see the important points by making a kind of ‘Greek Chorus’
that comments on the action in the chart or diagram. You can do this by drawing tiny people
speaking about the graphic right there on the page at the side of the image, (below).

Your little characters may even appear more than once, comic-book style (complete with
speech balloons) having a conversation amongst themselves about what’s going on in the
infographic, explaining parts of it from a different point of view. In effect, they are breaking the
‘fourth wall,’ by addressing the reader directly, outside the chart itself.




Above, Labels that are a (literal)
running commentary on the graphic.
From Attaché magazine, 1999.
(There’s that ear again!)

                                                                      Another one from Attaché, (right).
                                                                       Here the text here is treated as
                                                                         a series of comic book panels.
                                                                      George Washington’s comment at
                                                                     the bottom is even truer now than
                                                                        when it was published in 1998.
          NINE WAYS 65




HOW
A BILL
BECOMES
LAW
66 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




     Labels directly attached to their subject. From Navigator Magazine, 2006




             Intro text is minimal; the rest, just labels. From Food and Drink Infographics, 2018
                                                                                                   NINE WAYS 67




Two levels of info—the main graphic is the tan area. It could have run just like that, but we added explanatory
labels in black type around it. This is the version I sent to Bambi Nicklen, art director of Stanford magazine. Dr
Weissman, profiled in the related article, fiercely objected to us showing human figures inside the question mark,
so we removed them, but left all the text. If I didn’t believe it before, I do now: pictures speak louder than words!
68 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS
                                      NINE WAYS 69



For the giraffe graphic (left),
aimed at children, the text is
split up into a series of labels.
As with many of my pieces,
there’s some commentary at the
bottom, but this time it’s factual,
not there just for fun!
70 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



       Drawing

I was trained as an illustrator, and still love the physical act of drawing. There’s something
about the direct contact of pencil or pen with paper that excites me. That path from eye-to-
brain-to-hand-to-paper is not the same as mouse-to-screen. It’s possible that new generations
of i-Pads with digital pencils may change my mind.

In art school I drew from live models and ‘still’ life arrangements of fruit or classical busts.
Now I draw almost every day in the summer at a nearby beach; often in the white spaces in
newspaper advertisements. Sometimes there’s a nice sky at the top of the ad; I stick that onto
some simple foreground drawing. Pure white drawing paper is scary; newsprint is forgiving,
and just right for a fast sketch. It’s the act of looking that matters, not the art materials.




Looking—looking hard—at your subject, and drawing it, whatever it is—a picnic table, or a
small boat in the middle distance—is good practice for making better graphics. Don’t think
of drawing as something that captures surface likenesses, with light and shadow and all those
arty connotations. The great designer and artist Milton Glaser once said that the difference
between illustration and drawing is this: illustration is about surface appearances; drawing is
about drawing out—extracting—the meaning of the subject. (Not that there’s a great deal of
meaning in a picnic table, but I get the point, Milton, and thank you.)

Thinking about drawing and the role of traditionally constructed perspective can help you
make sure that readers understand your graphic. Here’s a simple demonstration about how
we perceive things, and the part perspective plays in affecting what we see (opposite).
                                               NINE WAYS 71



BIGGER BOATS, OR JUST BIGGER BECAUSE THEY ARE CLOSER?
72 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



The marriage of ‘real’ drawing with hard-edged, computer-generated artwork is an interesting
way to make reader-friendly infographics. David Driver, the Art Director of the Radio Times,
realized that by combining the talents of two of his regular contributors he could have, in
effect, a third conributor. He offered me many jobs that benefitted enormously from this kind
of collaboration with illustrators. On the following pages are three examples.

Peter Brookes is now the celebrated cartoonist at The Times, in London. He was one of the
artists that David paired me with. We collaborated on several ‘Behind the Scenes’ graphics—
these were technical and other aspects of how current events were broadcast by the BBC.

I asked Peter for his memories of our joint efforts celebrating the 1975 Apollo/Soyuz mission.
(See next spread.)

‘I enjoyed very much the experience of working alongside someone else with a quite separate set
of professional disciplines to my own (though in reality mine was much the lesser role). There was a
heightened sense of creativity putting together spreads of ‘infographics’ for Radio Times where ideas
could be bounced off each other. Marrying our different styles was exciting and, for me, new.

This (Apollo/Soyuz link-up) was the piece which I think resonated most
with me of all our ‘Behind the Scenes’ work. As a project it had everything: a
first in space (the joint Apollo/Soyuz mission involving a historic handshake
between Stafford and Leonov, the US and Soviet commanders); a great
opportunity to marry our styles in one mega-graphic; the chance to
incorporate interview quotes with the astronauts, and to extend the whole
thing with a cover illustration drawn by Nigel (right) and two black and
white programme page graphics, (one of them, opposite).

‘I loved incorporating portraits of these heroic participants in our tribute to such an inspiring event.
(By the way, they were glory days which could never happen now....imagine Putin and Biden thinking
it was a good idea!). The difficulty of combining a mono newsprint page with a full-colour page to
make a spread was overcome by placing the docked pair of spacecraft right across it. It couldn’t have
worked better in my opinion. In fact it was more than exciting to work on...it was out of this world!’

OK, Peter, don’t get carried away…but I have to agree, it was exciting!

One of the great things about the Radio Times projects was that David always treated us
as more than artists; he made sure that people were available so that we could gather the
necessary information, and in the case of the astronauts, he allowed us to interview them
ourselves. We set up a slightly amateur phone-plus-extension-phone system—elaborate for
the time!—in my house in London to conduct the interviews. As Peter says: ‘Without David’s
organising genius and enthusiasm, we’d have been far less effective.’
                                    NINE WAYS 73




Among his other styles, Peter
had a way of drawing that
mimicked old black and white
engravings. Apart from looking
good, they reproduced really
well on the rough newsprint
pages of Radio Times, and gave
our joint work an authority and
humanity I could never have
achieved if I had done this part
of the art myself. I stepped
back and did minimal graphics
on top of the outstretched arms,
which continued the theme of
the handshake in space.

Next spread, another of Peter’s
styles: fully rendered portraits.
74 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Astronaut portraits by Peter Brookes, capsules and docking station by me. Art Director David Driver
                                                                                             NINE WAYS 75




In 1975, when this spread was published, the Radio Times magazine sent color pages to the printer several days
in advance of the black and white ones. Also, the color pages were printed on smooth, coated paper, while the
rest was newsprint. Somehow, it always worked!
76 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Another ‘Behind the Scenes’ graphic I did with Peter was about how the radio and TV
announcer Frank Bough juggled his live commentary from two different sports, (below).

Peter on this one:
‘It helped that my own
style as an illustrator
was somewhat ‘straight-
forward’ and not too id-
iosyncratic. This might
have got in the way of
our narrative, which had
to be direct and to the
point. In this exercise of
delivering information in a
combination of words and
pictures, it could all have
gone horribly wrong! But
I do believe we cracked
it, and it was enormously
satisfying to work on.’

Peter continued:
‘Another aspect which
particularly     interested
me in our joint work, and
which spilled over into
my separate work as an
illustrator (and still does
now that I’m a political
cartoonist) is the need to
refine and edit continually
in order to make things
immediately comprehen-
sible to the reader. Less is
more. Of course, there should be enough content to make the whole thing interesting, but the message
must be CLEAR.We were taking up whole spreads in Radio Times and I currently occupy half a page
a day on The Times, so readers have to have their money’s worth!

‘Ideas, and the use of wit or humour in graphic work can have their difficulties. One person’s
comprehension of the artist’s intention is not another’s, but you have to try to keep this mismatch to
a minimum. All I ever try to do is to engage as many people as I can, and as directly as I can.’
                NINE WAYS 77




Left page: people by Peter;
graphic arrangement by me.
Right page: photo by Tony Evans
78 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Robin Jacques did the coach and landmark drawings; my silhouettes of the whole procession are underneath.

David was so good at planning, that in a joint effort with another artist, Robin Jacques, we never
met face-to-face while we worked separately on Queen Elizabeth’s Silver Jubilee Procession
from Buckingham Palace to St. Paul’s Cathedral, (above).That’s what good art directors do:
they set you up with how much space you have, put you in touch with a collaborator, then
leave you alone to decide how to proceed. Robin’s beautifully executed drawing of the Royal
Coach coupled with my simple graphic silhouettes show the best of our individual styles, and
readers get a fuller picture of the splendor, and the details, of the event.

While I was writing this, the Queen was celebrating her Platinum Jubilee, marking 70 years on
the throne, and people all over the United Kingdom were having picnic teas. Queen Elizabeth
died on September 8th, 2022. Long live King Charles III.
                                                                                 NINE WAYS 79




From the Radio Times, June 1977. Art Director David Driver

My realistic little sihouettes here are one way to draw, but early in my career I realized that
drawing people as elements in charts wasn’t that different from drawing abstract bars to
represent people. Also it let the reader know that the chart was about people. It’s funny when
people marvel at an ability to draw, telling you they can’t even draw a straight line. The easy
riposte is that no one can—we use a ruler! (And lots of other ‘cheating’ tools to make perfect
circles and ovals.)

I believe that anyone can draw; most of us naturally did so as unselfconscious children. We
made stickmen and women with straight lines and round heads. I made a half-joking handout
showing what I meant for a conference that consisted mostly of writers and editors. (See the
next page.)
80 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




At the start of my freelance career, I never completely believed in my drawing ability, so I did
rely on rulers, compasses, t-squares, lots of oval and circle templates, and ship’s curves, to
produce smooth, clean lines, drawn with always-clogging-up Rapidograph pens. (Ship’s curves
are 18-inch long pieces of stiff clear plastic, used like rulers to produce swooping lines that
range from almost straight to long, gentle arcs; the kind of thing great uncle George would
have used to draw ships.) This was before I got a computer, and drawing with these mechan-
ical aids meant that when I did get a Mac, the transfer to a completely mechanical method of
drawing was easier for me than it was for illustrators who drew more freely, but felt they had
to change and use a computer. (They didn’t.) I’m amused that the drawing program I started
with was called Freehand, since using a computer to draw is the opposite of free drawing.

But lately, some 35 years into using a computer, I have incorporated occasional, actual freehand
drawing which, when scanned, adds a human touch to the work, (right and following page).

                                            The workings of a saxophone from Attaché magazine, 1999.
                                                 The grayed-down drawing carries the whole thing, while
                                                           minimal infographic marks do the explaining.
            NINE WAYS 81




HOW THE
SAXOPHONE
WORKS
82 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                              Left, detail of a graphic
                                              from my book Crazy
                                              Competitions that
                                              includes scanned
                                              drawings. The energy of
                                              the wrestlers is better
                                              represented by ‘real’
                                              drawing.




       My mum had a riding school, so I
   grew up riding, and I’ve always loved
   drawing horses, but they look stiff if I
      construct the art with a computer
        drawing program. On the right is
   a detail from a piece about what to
 look out for during a polo match, from
       The Bigger Book of Everything—
      a book of graphics that explained
         how to do (almost!) everything.
                                                                                        NINE WAYS 83



       Adding Humans

My colleague John Grimwade always urges infographic designers to show some evidence of
human presence in their work. Here he is, describing what he calls deadworld:

‘Exhibit 1: A fabulous cutaway rendering of a shopping mall in hyper-real 3D. But there’s not a person
to be seen. First and foremost, the addition of just one person would immediately add an effective
sense of scale.Then there’s the eerie post-apocalyptic effect of busy spaces with no one in them.When
I look at this kind of infographic, I’m thinking that it’s 3am and someone has left the lights on.

‘Of course, it’s not necessary to add a realistic number of people. It’s more important that the graphic
is clear and explanatory. But infographics with no sign of human life have always seemed strange to
me. And cold.’

I’ve included people in many charts, not just those where an actual human would, as John says,
add a sense of scale. The reason is the same as his: a person, of any kind, in a chart gives the
reader something to identify with.

Empathy and inclusion
Many people, including software developer and writer Jacob Harris (Connecting with the
Dots), and Texas Tech professor Sam Dragga with author Dan Voss (Cruel Pies: The Inhumanity
of Technical Illustrations) have written about how images can humanize infographics. In 2015,
Harris, a self-described data scold, asked this question about empathetic design:

‘Should we even try with our graphics to make readers care? The Devil’s Advocate would argue that it’s
not the responsibility of our interactives to make people feel something about a topic—that is usually
handled by a narrative piece paired with them—but I feel that in these days where charts may be
tweeted, reblogged, and aggregated out of context, you must assume your graphic will stand alone.’

I agree, and I think joyful infographics should try to make people care by ‘seeing’ themselves
represented in printed or interactive pieces. Also, it’s important to remember that busy
policymakers may be among those who see your graphic ‘standing alone,’ so that the way you
address empathy can affect the way they see the data about which they will make decisions.

To make their point, Dragga and Voss suggest that Charles-Joseph Minard’s well-known chart-
map of Napoleon’s march could be humanized by adding pictorial icons to show the extent of
the deaths in more human terms. They say: ‘True, the pictographs are statistically redundant with
the diminishing width of the line—but they are not emotionally redundant. In fact, they add the vital
element that was missing—the human beings who constitute the fatality figures.’

While I think the principle is correct here, the result—with icons piled on top of Minard’s
84 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



graphic—is not aesthetically successful. I’m sure that if Minard had wanted to include icons of
infantry and grave markers, he would have designed the whole thing differently; but the point
is made.

The idea of making charts with little symbols of people has been around for a long time; if
we can call Egyptian wall-paintings with lined-up figures ‘charts,’ then that’s a possible starting
point. Closer to today,Willard Brinton shows good and bad examples in his 1914 book Graphic
Methods for Presenting Facts. In the 1920s, Otto Neurath built on that, with his Isotype system.
In 2014, Alberto Cairo and ProPublica’s Scott Klein developed Wee People, a font of human
silhouettes, drawn by Alberto from photos of the ProPublica newsroom staff, that can be lined
up to form charts in place of impersonal dots or bars, (below).




There’s a question about empathy when the key to a chart states that one of these little
people stands in for many. Is it really empathetic for your chart to say one person = 10,000?
Unit charts about non-human commodities—cotton, cars or cocoa beans—are fine if you
substitute one for many, but charts about people are best when it’s one-on-one; when the
numbers involved are represented by the same number of icons. It’s not always possible to
do this, but it should be kept in mind, because when one icon of a person represents many
people, the chart is almost as impersonal as when the person is just a dot.

Crossing the street; rating entertainment
You don’t mess with some signs: red for stop and green for go. It’s instant communication
for motorists. But for pedestrians? Let’s have some fun, (below).Why be content with generic
illuminated stickmen signaling to walkers when they must wait at the curb and when to cross
the street? Some cities, especially in Germany, are playing with amusing variations. Karl Marx
was born in Trier; Elvis Presley was stationed in Friedberg while he was in the US army in the
1950s. A human approach makes the mundane more enjoyable.
                                                                                         NINE WAYS 85



The Little Man icons in the San Francisco Chronicle’s arts and entertainment reviews use the
same human approach. Most entertainment rating systems in magazines or newspapers use
stars; thumbs up or down; A+, A, A-, B+, B, etc., or just numbers to grade cinema and musical
events. In 1942, Executive Editor Scott Newhall and artist Warren Goodrich introduced the
Chronicle’s theater and film ratings Little Man, (below). He snoozed if he thought a production
had problems, he jumped out of his seat with wild applause if he thought it was a ‘don’t miss’
event. His worst review was an empty chair: he had left the building, and you shouldn’t bother
to go. At 80 years old, he’s still as popular as ever.




The Chronicle’s website, SFGate.com, asked me for some comments about the Little Man for an
article by Robert Hurwitt about the paper’s famous graphic critic. Here’s what I said:

‘In the late 30s, Fortune magazine and others in the US started to populate their statistical charts
with pictorial symbols of people (to represent a number of workers, for example) instead of making
charts out of abstract bars or lines.This trend was itself an offshoot of the work of Otto Neurath who
pioneered the idea in Europe in the 20s.

When the Little Man first appeared in 1942, the Chronicle was expanding the idea of substituting a
human for an abstract symbol (such as a star). And what an inspired expansion it was!

Is the Little Man effective? An emphatic Yes! Because he brings a human element to reviews and so
much more information than the usual one- to four- or five-star rating. (Agreeing with his opinion is
something else, but that’s true of all reviews.)

Should he be updated to reflect today’s politically correct ways? I don’t think so (although I wouldn’t
mind trying). Let’s accept that not every movie goer is a bald, middle-aged man; that few people wear
hats, and that standing on the seats is probably not good for the person sitting next to you. Perhaps
we can just be happy that someone at the paper had some fun all those years ago, and that the Little
Man has been with us ever since.’

And here’s the Chronicle’s pop music critic Aidin Vaziri, from the same article:

‘Say what you will of the Little Man, but on the rare occasion that he is effectively deployed, it’s like
putting 16 exclamation marks at the end of a review. The visual rating is way better than a handful
of ambiguous stars.’
86 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Personal logos—monograms with a picture
Inspired by the 1920s trademarks of German graphic designers Karl Prinz, Philipp Seitz,
Konrad Jochheim, and my favorite, Karl Shulpig, I made pictorial logos for friends’ business
cards, (below). They were a kind of monogram with pictures that attempted to portray both
business attributes and, whenever I could, a simplified physical resemblance. (Hair seemed
to play a big role.) They lightened up the business of exchanging business cards, and helped
remind potential clients of the services offered. And if they made people smile, all the better.




Did they last as long as the Apple apple, or the Nike swoosh? No. But they were fun.




              Next pages: examples of graphics where humans have muscled in.
                                                                NINE WAYS 87




Above, an almost wordless explanation of how Wildfire (a
robot, phone-based, personal secretary) works. It seemed
right to do a little comic book sequence to explain it. While
the robot is exactly the same each time she appears, the
humans are in various states of excitement. The text of the
article filled the big empty space, but it looks good blank!
Esquire magazine, Art Director Robert Priest.
88 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




For Taschen’s huge Food
Infographics book, I thought
photos of citrus fruit would do
a better job than anything I
could draw.
                                                                                                 NINE WAYS 89




Serious infographic folks argue about the value
of pie charts, but they sure are fun to play with.




                                                     Parenting magazine wanted friendly infographics
                                                      to help their (mostly female) readers see what
                                                                   was on the minds of their menfolk.
90 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




This is the kind of chart that academics really hated. It appeared in
Glamour magazine, so few of them saw it! But the shape of the lines
really contributed to the message of the graph: it was fortuitous that
they converged so nicely.




                           The ‘Snapshot’ graphics on the front of each section of USA Today came
                           in for a lot of criticism (if not derision) when the paper launched in
                           1982. Art Director Richard Curtis was aware that his stable of artists
                           were looking a bit too closely at my Time graphics, and he graciously
                           invited me to talk to his team. This barely disguised self-portrait from
                           Time in 1985 included a nod to the real innovation there: George
                           Rorick’s groundbreaking back page weather map.
                                                                                                    NINE WAYS 91




 W H AT ’ S O N Y O U R S O L S A ™                                                  CAUTION
                                                 An Escape® SimpleRig™ boat                      Safety warning
                                                                                          Sailing can be dangerous and
                                                                                       physically demanding. The user of
                                                                                      this product understands that sailing
                                                                                      may result in serious injury or death.
                                                                                        Observe these safety standards:
                                                                                      Avoid contact between the mast
                                                                                      and overhead electrical wires.
                                                                                      Wear a nationally approved
                                                                                      personal flotation device.
                                                                                      Know how to swim.
                                                                                      Obtain certified first aid training,
                                                                                      and carry first aid and
                                                                                      rescue/safety equipment.
                                                                                      Get an updated local marine weather
                                                                                      forecast prior to departure.
                                                                                      Be aware of harmful weather
                                                                                      changes while sailing.
                                                                                      Share your sailing plans with an
                                                                                      attentive friend before departing.
                                                                                      Dress appropriately for the weather
                                                                                      conditions. Cold water and/or
                                                                                      weather can result in hypothermia.
                                                                                      Bring fresh water and drink
                                                                                      to avoid dehydration.
                                MAINSAIL                                              Take precautions to avoid eye and skin
                                                                                      damage from exposure to the sun.
                                                                                      Check your equipment prior to each
                                                                                      use for signs of wear or failure.
                                                                                      Always sail with others in sight.
                                                                                      Be aware of dangerous
                                                                                      currents or tides.
                                                                                      Avoid breaking waves
                                                                                      and/or surf conditions.
                             SPRIT
                                                                                      Be aware of other boats.
                                                                                      Do not exceed your sailing ability.
                                                                                      Be aware of your limitations.
                                                                                      Consult your physician
                                                                                      prior to your first sail.
                                                                                      Do not use alcohol or
     AUTOSAIL™          MAST                                                          mind-altering drugs prior
                                                                                      to or while using this product.
  WINDICATOR   ™
                                                                                      Never abandon the boat.
                                                                           CLEW

                                                                                    RIGHTING THE BOAT
  BOW                                                                                  Because
                                                                                          of the
                                                                       MAINSHEET       Escape’s
                                                                                   exceptional
  CLEAT                                                                            stability, you
                                               TILLER                      STERN       are very
  ONE-PIECE                                                                         unlikely to
  POLYETHYLENE                                                                     capsize. But
  HULL                                                                               if you do,
                                                                         RUDDER    getting the
  OAR MOUNTS/                                                                       boat back
  DRINK HOLDERS                                                                      upright is
  DAGGERBOARD                                                                      no big deal.
  IN TRUNK                                                 RUDDER BRACKET          Here’s the
                                                                                    sequence:
  COCKPIT DRAIN PLUG
                                                        TRANSOM PLUG

                                             EASY DOES IT

Adding human figures to graphics is
sometimes obvious. Escape Sailboats
needed waterproof set-up and sailing
instructions for its line of small, bright
yellow polyethylene boats. The human
figure gives size, context, and life.
92 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



             At Time magazine I incorporated human
               figures whenever I could in an effort to
                 bring facts straight into people’s lives.

                              Right, disposable income.
            Below, what it felt like for a family living in
                      America at the end of the 70s.
                                    NINE WAYS 93




   This chart for a Bankers Trust annual report does
  something I don’t recommend unless the numbers
let you stretch your humans without losing accuracy.
     The people here would look silly if the numbers
      were any smaller than the18% shown, or more
     than 40% or 45%. In any case, only stretch one
    element of the person, and make the parts that
mark percentages consistent across the chart. Using
        shadows gives you a second layer of plotting.
                        Art Director Melissa Makris..
94 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Above, adding humans
to a simple graphic
about the order of
loading bags for US
Airways magazine
helps you realize
what’s going on while
you are waiting to
take off. Hopefully      Left, when people
your precious holiday    interact with the
outfits are in the       graphic lines, you
hands of baggage         add info and
handlers who are in a    emotion.These
good mood that day.      charts were for
                         Money magazine




                                 Opposite, for the
                           Radio Times, I wanted
                            to give a good sense
                                of the size of the
                            frightening obstacles
                           encountered in three-
                                day cross-country
                                competitions, so I
                               added the fearless
                                  horse and rider.
NINE WAYS 95
                                                                                                 97




                                             Icons



Was this         the first icon? The first map? 30-40,000 years ago,            was a simple gesture
that said: the cave is that way. (Cue a wink about it being the first ‘digital’ map.)

You can call this tiny pointing hand many things: icon, ideogram, symbol, sign, pictogram (in
old typesetting shops, it was a manicule, or a ‘printer’s fist’)—the names don’t matter, but the
icons themselves do matter; they are an essential part of infographic vocabulary. They are
explanatory markers that, among other things, replace text.

Of course, early humans didn’t have any text to replace.They spoke but didn’t write. However,
they could draw icons as well as anyone today. Look at the images of animals they made on
the walls and ceilings of the Chauvet cave complex in France; they are uncannily similar to
signs that warn today’s drivers that animals might cross the road ahead. (See the history chapter)

The similarity shouldn’t surprise us. Cave painters, and graphic designers thousands of years
later, are after the same thing: the essence of the animal they are showing.The best, most direct,
most clearly understood image of an animal—or almost anything—is a side view, and that’s
what is on cave walls and today’s traffic signs. We are graphically linked to the cave painters.

The first symbol I was aware of was on the tins of petfood we gave our
dog in the 1950s. (Spratts made a bird and a cat version, too.) It was
the start of something small in my life—usually about an inch square.

I’ve done lots of icons. For an exhibition of my work at Stevenson University, the curator,
Amanda Hostalka, needed a bold image to fill a space, so I gathered about 900 icons and
symbols into a big poster, four feet across. (Part of it is on the next page, greatly reduced.) You
can see that some groups of icons were designed as a set and used for a specific job, while
others are arranged by subject matter: animals, people, transport, computers. I’ve used bits
from those categories over and over in my graphics; they are part of a personal vocabulary—
my own ‘clip art.’ It’s a good habit, whenever you make a graphic with little pieces of art in it,
to keep the pieces in labelled folders, so they can be used again. You’ll change them subtly to
make them exactly right for the particular reuse, but if you start from what you have already
98 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



drawn you’ll save tons of time and gradually build up your own icon arsenal of hearts, suns,
clouds, cars, cats, and dogs, and you won’t have to search (and pay) for clip art from the web
that could appear—or could have already appeared—in someone else’s work.

                                                                 Left, the top right-hand quarter of a big
                                                                 circle of icons and symbols for a show of
                                                                 my work at Stevenson University.




The first symbolst I did were for the program pages of the Radio Times, which was the weekly
magazine that listed everything on BBC radio and TV. Little black and white icons were used
in the program pages as visual links from one mention of a radio or TV broadcast to another
one airing the same subject at a different time of the day, like visual stepping stones. Most of
them were for live sports coverage—ice skating, soccer, golf, and so on, (below), and every 4
years, for the BBC’s coverage of the Olympic Games.
                                                                                                   ICONS 99



The Olympics have always produced their own official set of symbols, starting in earnest with
the London Games in 1948. Olympic officials at those first post-war Games realized that they
needed to have a common language to communicate with the athletes and visitors from the
many nations taking part.

My favorite Olympic symbols were made by Katsumie Masuru and Yoshiro Yamashita, for
Tokyo in 1964. This runner from the set (below) has wonderful energy.




Less aesthetically pleasing—less fun—but in the long run probably more influential, were
the icons designed by Otl Aicher for the 1972 Munich Games, (below). Aicher’s associate,
Heiner Jacob, said of their work: ‘The Tokyo signs were a basis. However, they were constructed
unsystematically … for Munich there is a constant set of elements: a body alphabet (head, body, arms,
and legs). The elements of this alphabet are arranged in a grid of four possible directions: horizontal,
vertical, and two diagonal lines.’




One of the reasons Aicher’s symbol set was influential in the logo design world was precisely
this grid. It was a kind of stick-man formula that gave designers a way to draw humans in
sports and other logos without having to think too much. The icons were neat—and they did
efficiently symbolize each Olympic sport—but they were cold.

So I was pleased to see that when the Games returned to Tokyo (delayed by Covid until 2021)
their official symbol set, designed by Masaaki Hiromura, nodded nicely to Masuru’s earlier,
more human icons, (right).




                                                          I think I’ll go for a run myself. Mustn’t forget to exercise!
100 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Álvaro Valiño’s Olympic sports symbols for The Washington Post, (above), were drawn originally
for the Rio Games in 2016, and updated for Tokyo with five new disciplines. While they use
a strict organizing grid system like Aicher’s Munich icons, these are light-hearted and warmly
humanized.

On the web, they are animated, and Álvaro has added minimal sound effects that make you
smile. It’s a pity you can’t hear them here. Have a look (and listen):
https://www.alvarovalino.com/Olympic-pictograms

They look good on a coffee mug, too, and you can see frames from the animation sequence.
ICONS 101
102 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



I like the winter symbols for the 1994 games in
Lillehammer, Norway. Freelance designer and illus-
trator Sarah Rosenbaum based her icons (right) on
a 4,000-year-old petroglyph from the Island of Tro
in the north of the country. It was the first known
image of a skier.
                                 In 2016, the image was
                                 scratched over by a man
                                 trying to make it more visible
                                 for tourists visiting the site.
                                 (This is copied from what
                                 remains of the original.)
Unlike all previous Olympic symbols, Rosenbaum’s
were scratchy, almost childlike, doodles that didn’t
follow ‘design’ rules but perfectly matched the
snowy Olympic locale. From the torch bearer to
the crazy downhill skiers, they embodied the joy-
ful spirit of the winter games in an original way.

                   In a 2005 interview by Farahnaz
                   Mojtahedi for the Iranian graphic design
                   magazine, Neshan, Sarah explained the
                   genesis of her icons, while she worked in
                   a small team of four, brought together by
                   Petter Moshus, Design Director for the
                   Lillehammer Games.

The brief said that the design should be ‘true’ and ‘Nor-
wegian,’ so I went looking for things with actual historical
reference. I came across a book about hieroglyphics in Nor-
way (carvings in rock from the Bronze age). I looked at the
squiggly figures and immediately thought they would make
nice sports illustrations, and seemed to fit the strategic
angle of the brief, having a link to ‘true’ history and a link to
‘real’, or natural material, like stone.

As soon as I started sketching from the images in the book,
the idea of making pictograms from the figures seemed
obvious. They were very clear and simple and nearly
abstract in their form. There were several that could be used
directly as sports pictograms with almost no alteration.The
symbol that became the bobsled was one of these. It was
as if it was an idea waiting to be found for this purpose. The
concept of creating pictograms in the fashion of historical
Norwegian stone carvings was an idea I brought to the
first meeting of the group of designers, which comprised
Knut Harlem, Reidar Holtskog, and Åsmund Sand, as well
as me. In the end it took me about three days to draw
each pictogram, using two kinds of pens, and working quite
small—only an inch or two high. The effect that the edge of
the ink made on paper resembled the uneven structure of
the stone in the original hieroglyphics.
                                                                                     ICONS 103



Lillehammer showed that it was OK for Oympic symbols to be fun. But
designers beware! Icons can be misunderstood. Readers wrote to the
Radio Times objecting to a golf symbol of mine. They thought it was a
closeup of a crotch. People will see what they want to see. It’s a good idea
to show a friend—not a designer—what you’ve drawn, and ask what they
think your image represents, and what else it might possibly be.

Some people think that my work includes unnecessary “embellishments,” (others call it chart
junk), but the design of icons is one area where I think stripping away unnecessary ‘junk’ is
the right thing to do. Despite my dislike of clichés, icons are usually a kind of cliché—an idea
honed down to its absolute and obvious minimum. In the 1920’s, while he was developing
Isotype, Otto Neurath instructed the artists making icons for his charts to cut the images out
of black paper, forcing them to simplify images so as not to get bogged down in unnecessary
surface detail. When artist Gerd Arntz joined the team, he didn’t need to be told how to
simplify an image—it was exactly what he had been doing all along with his linoleum cuts,
which Otto had seen at an exhibition in 1923. Gerd changed the way Otto’s team made
icons—from paper-cutting to linoleum-cutting—a move that had the added benefit of printing
multiple copies of the images from the cut lino.

But no matter how they were produced, Neurath was right to insist that his graphics team
find the visual essence of the icon they were drawing. And for that, choosing the best view
of the subject was important. This was more often than not a silhouette, or side view. Design
historian Ellen Lupton has described this approach as ‘pre-chemical photography,’ and Neurath
did suggest that his artists look at the flat shadow that an object cast, and draw that, instead
of the object itself.




The Italian archeologist Emmanuel Anati (born 1930) has proposed that early humans could
identify animal and human tracks in snow. He said that they learned to ‘read’ before they could
write. Neurath’s profiles and silhouettes (and shadows) were like Anati’s footprints—they
were ‘reflections’ of reality—documentary evidence, left behind by the real thing.

The Isotype system was more than a method of lining up icons
in rows to make pictorial bar charts. Neurath put two icons
together to make a third: by combining an image of a person with
an image of an i-beam, he made a steelworker.That same image of
a person with a loaf of bread added became a baker.

As with many clever ideas, this seems obvious to us today.
104 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Much of the icon work that Arntz did for Neurath—the surface look of it—is mimicked today,
and the graphic principles behind Isotype are often overlooked. But this chapter is about the
symbols, rather than their application to a system of chartmaking that uses countable pictorial
units; and Arntz’s drawings are such beautiful observations of whatever he was symbolizing, it
is easy to be seduced into copying his style, even if we have to update some of his images of
cars and phones. I’m sure that a good deal of the success of Isotype—and its current revival—
is because of the friendly look of Arntz’s contributions. Most of the symbols that he made 80
years ago look fresh today.

In his efforts to be both pictorially interesting and statistically
accountable, Neurath wanted the icons to be neutral, or
deadpan. But it’s hard not to have sympathy for Arntz’s
huddled, unemployed man, (right), or feel the weight of the
box this guy is carrying, (far right). The reason these images
by Arntz (redrawn here) are effective is that they were
the product of close observation by someone who was an
artist first and a graphic designer second. However simply
executed, we still enjoy looking at them, and recognizing the
humanity in such tiny pictures.

Emojis
Stripping away everything but the absolute graphic essentials when designing icons has hit a
brick wall with the déluge of emojis. What started as emoticons (emotional icons)—that is,
punctuation marks and other typographic characters arranged in a combination of keystrokes
to make pictures of faces, such as the famous smiley face :-) or this wink ;-) or Santa Claus
*<I:o)> —has ballooned into thousands of separate emojis today. (The word emoji doesn’t
stem from emotion, it comes from the Japanese words for image, pronounced eh, and
character, pronounced moji.)

Faces made out of punctuation first appeared in Puck Magazine in 1881 (below). The modern
versions were invented by Scott Fahlman in 1982. According to Pagan Kennedy, writing in
The New York Times Magazine, Fahlman’s smiley face :-) was intended ‘to take the sting out
of mocking statements’ and other differences of opinion on online forums. He called his
invention a joke marker.
                                                                                   ICONS 105



In 1993, Tota Enomoto published Niko! [Smile!] The Smiley Collection, with 200 emoticons you
could read without tilting your head sideways. Compared to western keyboards, there are
many more characters available on Japanese keyboards, so pictures of faces can be horizontal.

But soon, five or six—or even just three—keystrokes, like Fahlman’s :-) proved to be too
much for people who wanted to add a tiny picture to their email and text messages. Enter
the emoji. One touch on the keyboard and there was a picture. The first examples are often
credited to Shigetaka Kurita. They are enshrined at New York’s Museum of Modern Art. (Below,
the installation.) Kurita created 176 characters for the Japanese phone company NTT Docomo,
in the i-mode division, in 1998 and 1999. (Docomo stands for ‘DO Communications Over
MObile network.’ Also, Dokomo means ‘everywhere’ in Japanese.)




However, in 1997, another Japanese company, SoftBank (called J-phone at the time), produced
a set of 90 emojis for their Skywalker DP-211SW model.These were the first emojis designed
for mobile phones. In 2019, Shigetaka Kurita himself acknowledged as much in a tweet. As of
this writing, the designer of the SoftBank emojis is unknown.

In 2010, emojis were added to the International Unicode Consortium, a non-profit group of
programmers who standardized the coding of fonts so that computers and phones all talk
to each other in the same way. With the release of Emoji 14.0 in September 2021, there are
now roughly 3,600 emoji characters on the Unicode list. It’s a big number partly because
many human faces are pictured in a range of different skin tones.You can look them all up on
emojipedia.org.

I understand the intent to create racial and gender equality in emojis. However, I fear that
eventually there’ll be such a glut of images, designed to cater to everyone while offending no
one, that we will be overwhelmed by the massive choice, and I wonder if we might inadvertently
make some racial or gender mistake in a text or other message. What happened to the idea
of making symbolic instead of pictorial, literal, images? Perhaps, for no better reason that
emojis are tiny, they are considered to be the same thing as symbols. They are not.
106 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



I sent a screen shot of the 200 (!) different emojis that can be used to represent a ‘couple’ to
my granddaughter, Kai, (aged 16 at the time) who replied: ‘I think it’s great to see the inclusivity,
but ya I’d have to agree it’s a bit much when you type each of them out. I personally was very happy
to see the non-binary emojis added, including couple ones, but I can’t rly speak for POC on how POC
emojis being added might’ve felt. It’s a nice feeling when you see something that represents you in
such a small thing like emojis. Again, when you type each of them out it does seem exaggerated, but
(to me) so do all the food emojis, or the different type of trains.They don’t take up much space, it’s set
up so you can kinda customize your own couple, but I do see how people could see it as too much.’

It’s a touchy subject. But regardless of the color of our skin, or hair, or haircut, or sexual
difference we are all PEOPLE first. Most variations of the original smiley face are still available
in yellow—i.e., not race- or gender-based—but now you have your choice of different skin
tone, hair color, beard. Symbolically speaking, I don’t think we need all the available tiny pictures
of police officers. They are no longer symbols when there’s so much pictorial detail in them.
This one from Docomo is just fine.

And symbols are what I’m going on about here. Empathy and inclusion is important in
infographics and I have addressed that in the section about adding humans and humanity to
your graphics.

When making icons of people for Isotype-like charts, consider making them blue. Using a
blue figure of a person is not a way to avoid questions of difference or inequality, it simply
makes everyone equal, whereas showing people in precisely color-calibrated, almost-realistic,
pictures amplifies the differences—that’s the intention, of course—but it does not promote
equality. Our western alphabet has 26 letters, and it’s pretty good at giving us many ways
to say what we want to say; will 3,600 (and counting) emojis ever become an efficient way
to communicate equality, as we abandon words and fall deeper into the language of texting,
hunting through the pile for the right shade of skin or hair color, or hair length, not to mention
the person’s age, physical appearance, and the right uniform for the job? No, 3,600 will never
be enough.

BBBBBUT, I hear you say, don’t emojis lighten up written language? Isn’t that exactly the sort
of joyful thing this book is all about? My argument has less to do with the realistic look of
emojis—although I do prefer simpler graphic versions—it has more to do with the attempt to
become a language desperately aiming to include everyone. Symbols already include everyone.

Strings of emojis or emoticons aren’t a new language. They are messages that are not
completely spelled out—they are inferred—your eye reads part of them. You learn the code
as you go along, and your friends learn your message-language, your use of emojis, which have
different meanings for different people. Here’s Kai again, in response to my asking this:Why do
you use :) and not a yellow smiley face emoji at the end of your text message? Are emojis out
                                                                                               ICONS 107



of fashion? Kai: ‘I tend to use :) :( >:) and such as more general emojis.The others I’ll use to help
specify or exaggerate a tone I’m using … I wouldn’t say emojis are out of fashion exactly, just being
used differently. It also varies from person to person, it’s a stylistic choice in the end. Also, in my case
at least, It’s faster to type it out, instead of having to look for a specific one.’

By the way, >:) is a devilish smile. Kai says: ‘if hahaha is :) then hehehe is >:)’

Emojis are fun, but they are not a language. I mean, try reading Emoji Dick; it’s a version of Moby
Dick that replaces all Melville’s words with emojis.The creator, Fred Benenson, prints the text,
too. Here’s the famous first line:                        Have fun ‘reading’ it!

That said, there is one book that consists entirely of
emojis, symbols, and icons that I happily recommend:
Book from the Ground: from point to point, by Xu Bing,
2013 (right), a graphic novel that describes 24 hours
in the life of an urban white-collar worker. I knew this
was what the book was about before I started to ‘read’
it because it helpfully says so on the back cover—the
only place where any words appear. It’s a beautifully
designed book, and while the simple plot description
is welcome, the graphic thinking inside is clear, and
ultimately the story is a pleasure to read—albeit a little
slow—so it was hardly necessary to explain the idea.

Xu Bing says: ‘Twenty years ago I made Book from the Sky, a book of illegible Chinese characters that
no one could read. Now I have created Book from the Ground, a book that anyone can read. Though
quite different, the two books share something in common: regardless of a reader’s language or level
of education, the books treat all readers equally. Book from the Sky was an expression of doubt and
alarm regarding preexisting systems of writing; Book from the Ground expresses the ideal of a single,
universally understood language, and my sense of the direction of contemporary communication.’’

Linguists, designers, social scientists, teachers, and a 12th century nun, among hundreds (yes,
hundreds!) of others, have invented what they hoped would be internationally understood
languages. None have lasted. Esperanto (by Ludwik Zamenhof, 1887) came closest; Klingon (by
Marc Okrand, 1984) survives as a pop curiosity for devoted Star Trek followers. JRR Tolkein’s
passion for invented languages led him to construct grammars and vocabularies for Elvish,
among many other languages in his books.

Tolkein was a calligrapher and he created scripts to go along with his inventions, but very few
invented languages were pictorial, and those that were have not fared any better than their
purely alphabetic cousins.
108 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Three picture languages have come the closest to
success: Charles Bliss’s Semantography from 1949, (top
right)—Bliss later named it Blissymbolics; Yukio Ota’s
LoCoS (Lovers’ Communication System) from 1964, (bottom
right); and Otto Neurath’s Isotype from the 1920s.
Unlike the first two, Neurath never claimed that he had
invented a total language; he called it a ‘helping language’
rather than a complete substitute for the written word.

Neurath had the right idea, and linguist Neil Cohn
has written that there will never be a universal visual
language, certainly not one called Emoji. Put simply, we use different spoken and written
languages in the world because we come from different cultures. It’s even more apparent with
icons, symbols, pictures. Cohn: ‘…people who do not have cultural exposure to images often have
difficulty understanding the meaning of images.’ Different cultures see things differently.

But let’s speculate! If a truly universal picture language could ever be created, it’s a fair guess
that it would be on your phone. 80% of people in the world have a smart phone—that’s 6.5
billion people—and it’s the way we communicate, like it or not. Today, tap ‘thank you’ into
Google Translate when writing to a friend in Germany, and get ‘danke’ back in an instant. Perhaps
tomorrow there’ll be a device that translates any language into pictograms—flat and symbolic,
I hope—drawn from a huge visual vocabulary that encompasses all cultural differences. I said
it would be a huge vocabulary, but, hey, computers are good at handling that sort of thing.
However, even if we assume that Neil Cohn’s warning about cultural misunderstandings is
taken care of, there is a reason for not doing this: if the point is clear communication, we can
already use artificially intelligent earbuds to translate conversations while we speak and listen
(and interrupt). Why do we need pictures at all?

For joy, that’s why! For fun, and to soften that email; to wink, to say something visually that we
can’t quite say in words. Emojis are good at that. They are Neurath’s ‘helping language.’

I was glad when Apple changed its operating system icons—the ones for phone, music,
messages, mail, etc.—from 3-d renderings to simpler, flattened images.The old style was called
skeuomorphism, which referred to icons that were practically photographs of what was being
depicted—trashcans or file folders, for instance. The change happened around 2013, when
other big corporations were similarly flattening their logos; the iconic Volkswagen VW in
a circle became starkly simple, losing its reflective, beveled edges that cast deep shadows.
Similarly, Nissan, Toyota, Intel, PBS, Warner Bros., and Burger King, and others simplified their
logos. Today, emojis are in flux, design-wise. Those tiny fully-rendered portraits of people
and animals and everything else, with their 3-d shadows and shiny surfaces remain on some
platforms, but Microsoft’s Windows 11 Fluent emojis are now 2-d, while Apple’s IOS icons
                                                                                          ICONS 109



have crept back into the color gradation and shadow game.

This is my humble plea for future emoji designers: instead of little pictures, let’s use symbols—
simple symbols—that get to the essence of the person or thing, and that don’t try to be
realistic renderings. Check out Noto Emoji; a nice start—in glorious black and white!

Smile!
Graphic designer Art Chantry tried to discover the origin of the happy, or smiley face—the
forerunner of the most well-known emoji. Chantry’s graphic digging is a chapter in Steve
Heller’s book I Heart Design. Many people have claimed they were the inventor of the smiley
face. Often cited is graphic designer Harvey Ross Ball who drew a round yellow face with dark
eyes and wide smiling mouth for State Mutual Life Assurance Company of Worcester, Mass, in
1963, to be used on buttons, cards and posters. It took him 10 minutes, and he was paid $45.

The most joyful—and easily the largest—version
I know of is in the Douglas fir forest in Oregon,
where David Hampton, owner of Hampton Lumber,
planted larch trees that turn brown each fall and
make a 300-ft happy face, (right).

In the end, Chantry’s answer to who invented the
happy face is that…‘every little girl who dotted her
i with a smiley face is the author. Every person who
slaps a smiley emoticon onto their comment on a blog
or email is the author. Every ad agency hack who thinks they invented the concept of a smiling little
face is the author.We are all the author.The happy face basically grew on a tree. Maybe a cherry tree.’

Sounds right. ‘Cherry tree’ refers to The Cherry
Hut, a store in Beulah, Michigan, founded in 1922,
whose logo is (still) a cherry-red happy face.



                                       Smiley afterthoughts
                    Amazon neatly encapsulates its business
                   with an underline ‘smile’ from A to Z in its
                 logo. Too bad when a package lands upside
                down on your porch, and it’s scowling at you.



                And why does Hyatt have a growling mouth
                    in its logo? Don’t they want to put on a
                    happy face to greet you in their hotels?
110 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Will you be my Valentine?
Where did the heart shape come from? Visually, it’s a stretch from the bloody throbbing blob
in our chest. What happened, graphically? Three theories.…

                     It’s an image of the silphium seedpod. Silphium, a type of fennel,
                     was critical to the economy of the Greek colony of Cyrene, in the
                     7th century B.C. It was thought to be a contraceptive, and became
                     associated with sex. It was so popular that they put the modern heart-
                     shaped image of the seed on their coins.

                     Cupid and the idea of romantic love took hold of the Medieval
                     imagination in the 1400s; the heart shape was seen as the head of
                     Cupid’s arrow with the pointy parts rounded.




                     Upside down, it’s the shape of a butt. Hmmm.




                     Who needs a theory when you can tap out a nice emoticon?



It’s said that the heart icon is a nothing but a botched drawing of the real anatomy.
But look: it’s not that botched—here’s an old engraving, and my heart diagram from Mortality.
                                                                                    ICONS 111



The best use of the heart icon is Milton Glaser’s much copied I [Heart] New York, famously
first scribbled in the back of a taxi.This is a whole page from The New York Times on September
14th, 2001. At the very bottom, you can see the sponsor using a heart in their own tagline.
112 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Showing the way
You’ve seen Paul Mijksenaar’s wayfinding icons and maps if you have flown into or out of many
of the world’s airports. His first airport job was for Schiphol, Amsterdam, in 1990. Here are
some of the many symbols he and his team produced.




Paul always thinks of the traveler first, and his humor shines through his work. When he
found out that car owners had trouble reconnecting with their cars in Schiphol’s numbered
parking facilities, he commissioned Dutch cartoonist Opland to draw ‘visual reminders’ for
each section and floor of the three huge parking
lots. If you parked your car in the ‘Holland’ section,
you went there and then followed the windmill or
cow or clogs signs, (right).

Voila! (Or whatever that is in Dutch—a notoriously
difficult language, and thus all the more reason for
international wayfinding signs.) In 2012, Opland’s
original black and white drawings were redrawn, in
color, by Max Kisman.

Paul’s good humor as the overall designer of signage
at Schiphol, is also evident in the oft-imitated fly
in the urinal symbol. The man in charge of toilet
cleaning at the airport, Jos van Bedaf, had the idea
of putting a drawing of a fly in the urinal bowls, to
prompt men to aim better, (right).

Paul Mijksenaar makes travel easier when you might
be stressed, and more friendly when you might feel
like a herded animal. That’s why he’s included here
as a joyful infografisto.
                                                                                        ICONS 113



Turning language into pictures—literally
Luigi Farrauto used to work in the
Mijksenaar office. For this project—
it was his dissertation thesis, and
it got him the job with Paul—Luigi
first designed a modern Arabic
typeface, then used the shapes of the
letterforms to ‘draw’ buildings and
places in Damascus, in the same way
that this :-) is a face. Luigi’s icons are
typographic pictures of destinations
(the lighter blue squares, right). Arabic
speakers may be able to read
fragments of Arabic words in these typographic pictures, while tourists can sense the Arabic
‘feel’—seeing the pictures as part of the signs (which include the name of the café, mosque,
sauna, or souk in English). An arrow points pedestrians and drivers in the right direction. It’s
signage that adds a light touch to the street, with a nice flavor of the city.

Like Luigi Farrauto’s Arabic-based
pictures of buildings, other written
languages that don’t use the Roman
alphabet can be ‘translated’ by turning
their letterforms into pictures in
order to understand their meaning.

Some of these languages were
pictorial in the first place—Japanese
kanji characters for instance, evolved
into abstract shapes from the
picture-language of ancient China.
Michael Rowley drew friendly visual mnemonics of Japanese characters for his 1992 book,
Kanji Pict-o-graphix, (above). In the introduction, he explains that Japanese schoolchildren learn
by writing each kanji hundreds of times at their desks. He continues: ‘If you are not a Japanese
schoolchild, you probably do what I did: stare at each one and make up a story that you can mentally
‘attach’ to the kanji to help you recall its meaning when you meet it again.’ Michael’s book has a
over a thousand kanji explanations—about half of all kanji characters in general use in Japan.

In this chapter, we’ve looked at signs, icons, symbols, pictograms—what we call them doesn’t
matter. How well they communicate ideas does.

Next pages: a gallery of icons.
114 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Earlier in this chapter, I showed
you Álvaro Valiño’s Olympic icons.
Here’s his set of icons for the
Rundfunk Symphony Orchestra
Berlin.

From the conductor to the triangle
player, they are wonderfully simple
images of classical musicians
playing their instruments.

Álvaro comments on the job:

‘At first, I was a bit shocked
that they contacted me from a
Symphonic orchestra. I have to
confess I don’t know much about
classical music, but I truly love the
effect it produces on me, mind
and body... everytime I go to a
concert.

This project is a cousin of my
Olympics work for The Washington
Post in its formal flavor. The
communications people at the
Symphony orchestra weren’t
happy with any of their existing
visual repertoire—visual voice,
logo, typography, images—they
wanted to change everything.

So I started working with them
around the idea of forgetting the
logo and making these evolved
iconic illustrations into their visual
language. The lines, the color, the
playful but clean spirit...They are
very happy with this approach.’

Álvaro continued this visual
language with posters, booklets,
programs, and composer portraits;
Beethoven is over there on
the right.
ICONS 115
116 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                                                                   Richard Saul Wurman was

      beauty & body                                                             hired by the pharmacy chain
                                                                                 CVS to organize their stores.
                                                                                    He wanted everything to
                                                                                  be centered on the human
                                                                                         body. A graphic, (left)
       IN WHICH AISLE CAN I FIND...?                                              showed shoppers where to
                                                                                       find different products.

                                                                                 Below, a different approach
        9 Haircare                                                               (Here, the Spanish version.)
                            Eyecare 12

     Ear, nose &      Makeup 8
    mouth products
      5 6          Prescriptions PHARMACY

                     Heart monitoring PHARMACY

     11 Asthma &
        breathing                      Skincare 4

    Aches
  6 & pains                  Stomach
                            & digestion 6                          belleza & cuerpo
                                                                                       pelo


                                   Hand
                                  creams 8                                                              dolores de
                                                                      ojos                               cabeza


                  Feminine         Nail
                  products        polish                           alergias                             orejas




         $
                     13             8                                                         boca
   Help
   with                                                                                       recetas
insurance                                            0-5                                                                      minute
                                                                                                                              clinic
                                                    años
    10
                                                           manos                                                     seguro
                           Sports                                             asma             corazón
                          bandages 4                                  diabetes                       digestión




       Sun                                                          heridas                             piel


     screens
       8                                                       artritis                                    vendajes




            Footcare 6                                        pies                                               de edad
                                                      ICONS 117




For Golf Digest magazine, part of a set of 22 icons
for the section that dispensed help with your swing
and other problems, showing many of the different
clubs used. (Art Director Ina Saltz)
118 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Above and below, for a project directed by
RKC!, these are two versions of a set of icons
for Smithfield Farms.
                                                                                       ICONS 119




The photographer Kwaku Alston had an idea for a yoga app. These are two
slightly different looks at ‘section’ headings. Although they are basically stick
figures, I wanted a softer, more fluid feel.




                                                                                    For the
                                                                                    Mexican Yellow
                                                                                    Pages phone
                                                                                    directory,
                                                                                    Richard Saul
                                                                                    Wurman asked
                                                                                    me to design
                                                                                    a set of icons
                                                                                    for the different
                                                                                    category
                                                                                    listings.
120 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS
                                                                               ICONS 121




                                                Above, Stanford magazine published a big
                                                  feature on all aspects of recycling at the
                                                   University, in 2019. These photographic-
                                               plus-stickmen icons went with items about
In 2014, Della van Heyst started the        recyling food scraps, plastic, electronics, paper,
Billion People Project, a smartphone-              construction and landscaping materials.
based way to record personal recycling                         (Art Director Bambi Nicklen).
activities and habits, to post the
results and compare one’s efforts to
others’. Left, the complete set of icons,
actual size; what they look like on a
smartphone; below, the logo.
122 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                        These single-line
                                        drawings (with a
                                        few dots) were for
                                        Network World
                                        magazine. Some
                                        imagery gets
                                        outdated fast…




                                 …this is what desktop
                                 computers looked like
                                 in 2000.




                                                                 Art Director
                                                             Caroline Bowyer
                                                              asked me for a
                                                               set of symbols
                                                                  for different
                                                              departments in
                          …remember                          This Old House
                          pagers?                                   magazine.
                                                                                           ICONS 123




George W. helped navigate the intricacies of how the government works for Kids Discover magazine.
(Art Directors Mary K. Baumann and Will Hopkins)




                             For Condé Nast’s first prototype of a new financial magazine—the working
                                 title was Currency—I drew a little money person to animate the pages.
                                                                           (Art Director Tom Bentkowski)
124 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




  A set of symbols for Vanity Fair magazine in 2006 about the way
  politically red states had higher rates of deaths by guns, incarceration,
  female incarceraton, divorce, illegitimacy, suicide, obesity, and executions.




  For Details magazine in 2002, these were questions to ask before a
  blind date: Do you have body piercings? Long hair? Smoker? Drinker?
  How old are you? Do you go skinny dipping? Are you tattooed?




   Icons for sections of the Industry Standard. (Art Director Bob Ciano)
                                                                                                   ICONS 125




Logos for Neoptix, a sunglass manufacturer.


Today, many logos are abstract, geometric shapes. Businesses think they need a mark that’s
abstract enough to include all possible new acquisitions or changes to their line of work. The
logo for Meta, the umbrella name for Facebook and its offshoots, is an example of this. It’s a
variation of the mathematical symbol for infinity, which has been around for a long time.




                                 ∞               The infinity symbol, invented
                                                 by an English maths guy,
                                                 John Wallis, in 1655

About their version of infinity, Mark Zuckerberg’s design team is quoted as saying that the new
logo ‘is designed to grow and change with the company as the metaverse is created.’

Does this mean designers have to make their logos as bland and meaningless as possible so
anything can be read into them at any time in the future? What a pity.Wit should have a place in
the boardroom. A smile can help in many ways—people remember logos or symbols because
they are amused or intrigued, or simply because they can see something (or themselves) in it.

One picture is worth a thousand abstractions.

And if there’s a human in the picture, probably two thousand.



                                    To see the symbols and icons clearly in this chapter, I’ve
                                    enlarged most of them. When designing symbols, don’t forget
                                    that many will be tiny when they appear in print. These
refugee icons are designed to be used at this small size on maps. (They show refugees from
three different time periods: with a bundle carried on the back from long ago; with a suitcase
during mid-20th century; with a wheeled suitcase from today.) A question arises about the
gender of such people depicted: are all stick figures men? In a war, it’s more likely that the
people who are fleeing will be women and children (the men are fighting), so should that be
reflected in the icon? Or can icons like that just represent people, regardless of their gender?
                                                                                               127




                               Joyful presentations



The annual Stanford Professional Publishing Course (SPPC), where I taught from 1980 to
2009, was where I learned how to play with different ways to present information, and get
the audience to play along with me. In the 1980s, the SPPC lasted two weeks and included
70-odd lectures. After a first intense week that was all about writing, editing, and copyright law,
people were understandably exhausted, and needed a breathing space. So, when the weekend
came along it was the turn of the ‘art department’—illustration, typography, photography,
art direction, and myself on information graphics. We were no less intense, but the teaching
experience for attendees felt different, moving from Stanford classrooms to a campus theater
auditorium with a huge screen where we could show off our images. And a backstage! Here
I could hide all sorts of props.

Over the years, these included a life size, flat construction of a horse with moveable legs to
demonstrate Muybridge’s proof that all four hooves are off the ground at certain times while
galloping; a full set of drums; and three helium-filled weather balloons that unspooled rolls of
toilet paper printed with dollar bills to make a wall-sized bar chart of money. (See next page.)

Della van Heyst, the organizer and first host of the course, gently pushed me to try different
approaches to making presentations. Back home in Westport, Connecticut, I enlisted the help
of my wife’s stepfather, Lenny Stea, a sound engineer, who had a recording studio there. Lenny
made me cassette tapes (remember those?) of sound effects, snippets of music—as well as
audience applause and laughter, in case there wasn’t any—to use in the talks. Later, we did
everything digitally and it was much easier to cue up the sounds.

Della, and her successor Holly Brady, always made sure that there would be time for me to set
up and rehearse some of the more extreme effects in the auditorium, with no audience there.
I usually did this with the help of a wonderful Stanford audio-visual technician, Guy Bailey,
whose patience while I set up my stuff, seeing what was going to work and what wasn’t, was
as much of a help as I could possibly have had. Make friends with the AV team!

Rehearsal is important. Not just knowing the order of your slides—although that’s essential,
too. If you don’t prepare, and aren’t sure what the next slide is while you are lecturing, your
128 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



MY PRESENTATION OF HOW
MUYBRIDGE WON A BET FOR HIS
SPONSOR, LELAND STANFORD




presentation comes across as a self-centered portfolio show. ‘Oh, yes, and then I did this…’
doesn’t sound professional when you are surprised by an image you had forgotten you had
included. And if you attempt something beyond a standard PowerPoint show that is just you
talking with pictures projected next to you, rehearsal is even more important.

Some live presentations were performed versions of charts I’d already done in print. One of
these was showing how many hot dogs are eaten at the annual Hot Dog Eating Contest at
Coney Island, New York. I had become obsessed with how Takeru Kobayashi managed to eat
50 of them. (That was in 2001; subsequent years saw that number eclipsed, and the record
                                                                      JOYFUL PRESENTATIONS 129



RAISING THE
$64,000 WALL
OF MONEY




set by Joey Chestnut in 2021 is now 76 hot dogs—eaten in 10 minutes. My question was how
to show that amount of not-very-good-for-you-processed meat. Clearly, my demonstration
would fall short of the real-life event, but I could explain the eating technique that Takeru
developed and which most competitive eaters now use.

It’s this: dunk the bun into a glass of water, and stuff it down your throat using the hotdog as a
kind of plunger. Repeat 50 times. I did it with just one hotdog, then put on an xxx-large t-shirt
with images of hotdogs sewn onto it. I stuffed a pillow up the t-shirt. The result was a sort
of silly x-ray of my stomach.
One fun-loving conference
organizer in Holland had 52
hot dogs cooked and brought
onto the stage to show the
quantity consumed by the
most recent competition’s
winner; it was nice to be able
to hand them out to the first
few rows of the audience,
(right).
130 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



I asked John Grimwade, well-known for lively and inventive infographic in-person lectures, to
tell me a bit about his approach to making presentations:

‘I’ve usually started presentations with a little humor, to break the ice and to make it clear that I don’t
take myself too seriously. Sometimes, depending on the subject and audience, I’ve included quite a few
light-hearted elements spread throughout a lecture. Of course, it’s a well-established way to engage
people, but is much more effective if the humorous parts of a presentation relate in some way to the
rest of the content.’

John added two warnings from his experience:

• We’re not professional entertainers.
‘There’s always the lurking danger of straying into what I call ‘stand-up comedy territory.’ Humorous
items that do not reference the general theme are not going to add to the credibility of a lecture. And
yes, I admit, I’ve made this mistake several times myself, through nervousness, or a worry that the
audience isn’t going to be interested in the material I’m presenting.’

• Know your audience
‘While humor can be a definite asset, it also has the potential to fall flat, and then you wish you
hadn’t attempted it. The comment or image (or both) that you thought would bring the house down,
is not understood at all, and is followed by an uneasy silence. This possibility is something to carefully
consider when preparing your lecture. There’s no easy answer to this, but if in doubt, err on the side
of caution.’

John’s point about not being professional entertainers is important. Sometimes I’ve felt that I
have been asked to lecture as though I am one, and this is because conference organizers are
happy to temper the more obviously serious lectures in their agenda with a lighter one. If the
title of your presentation is Can Humor be Appropriate in Information Design? you are expected
to deliver some fun!

Make sure that your content has a serious intent in there somewhere, even if it’s delivered
with a light touch. Invite a few people up from the audience and get them to help you construct
a live chart in front of their fellow attendees. This both amuses and informs. It’s what I call
performance graphics, and it includes two of the main points about joyful infographics: context,
and, obviously, audience.

There’s an old Chinese proverb:
Tell me and I’ll forget; show me and I may remember;
involve me and I’ll understand.
                                                                         JOYFUL PRESENTATIONS 131



This is an audience involvement piece I’ve given a few times.

Million, Billion,Trillion
Before this lecture, I printed signs big enough to be seen at the back of any large meeting
room. The signs read 1,000,000; 1,000,000,000; and 1,000,000,000,000.

Did you have to think a bit before you said million, billion and trillion to yourself? All those
zeros are part of the problem. When it came to this part of the talk, I invited six people to
come up and join me on the ‘stage.’ I explained that together we were going to set up a
timeline, measured in years.

The timeline started with ‘today’ at one end, had a midpoint of 16,000 years ago, and finished
with 32,000 years ago at the other end. (The wider the stage the better.) Three participants
stood at these points. Next, I handed out the signs. One of the remaining three participants
got the ‘million’ sign, a second got the ‘billion,’ and a third the ‘trillion.’ I told them that these
numbers represented a million seconds, a billion seconds, and a trillion seconds, and that we
were going to plot where each of these numbers fell on the timeline we had just made.

Not many people know how long a million seconds is, let alone a billion or a trillion. I have
friendly fun asking the audience and the person holding the 1,000,000 sign. There are wild
guesses about where he or she should stand on the timeline. The answer: a million seconds is
12 days. I ask the 1,000,000 sign-holder to stand 12 days away from the person who’s standing
at ‘today.’ Considering that the three human markers on the timeline are 16,000 years apart,
it’s almost impossible for the person with the million sign to stand close enough to ‘today.’ But
it’s fun to watch them try.

Next, the sign for a billion seconds. Where is that on our timeline? A billion seconds is 32
years. Again, given the scale of years we have set up, this number is also very close to ‘today.’
There’s more fun as three people now try to stand on virtually the same spot.

Finally, a trillion seconds. By this time, there’s often someone in the audience who sees what
I’m getting at. If a billion seconds is 32 years, then a trillion is 32,000 years. Three more zeros.
The person holding that sign walks right past the 16,000-year mark to the far end of the
timeline. What’s left for the audience to see is a million (seconds) and a billion practically on
top of one another, and a trillion at the other side of the room.

If space—and technology—permit, the enormous span of time shown here can be underlined
with slides. When the first human marker stands in position at one end of the timeline, an
image to represent ‘today,’ perhaps a computer, could be projected behind them. In the middle
of the timeline, at 16,000 years ago, an image from the Lascaux Caves in France, and at the far
end, 32,000 years ago, an image from the Chauvet caves, also in France. In addition to seeing
132 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



the difference in the numbers, the audience can see that cave painting constituted a very long
art ‘movement,’ the imagery changing hardly at all during the 16,000 years between Chauvet
and Lascaux, compared to art ‘isms’ of the last two centuries, which have positively tripped
along: impressionism, pointillism, fauvism, futurism, cubism, surrealism, etceterism, etceterism.

Up, up and …
In the ‘nine ways’ chapter, we’ve seen that it’s good to give an audience something they can
understand in terms of their own bodies. Here’s another example: a stack of one million
dollars in $100 bills comes up your waist. Even if you can simply say that, people can see it—no
graphic is necessary. I know it’s an approximation; clearly, there would be more than a million
dollars in the stack at Michael Jordan’s or LeBron James’s waists, while P.T. Barnum’s Tom
Thumb, who was 3’ 4” tall—the same height as the million-dollar stack of $100 bills.

The million-billion-trillion demonstration works best in a wide room; this next one uses a
helium balloon to bring a big number down to a human scale, and is best done in a room with
a high ceiling. It takes some preparation: I inflated a weather balloon with helium to about 36
inches wide, and used that to raise a 10-foot long string with markers attached to it. Birthday
balloons aren’t strong enough; they will float up, but they have surprisingly little lifting power
if anything is tied onto the string, (opposite).

Here’s some audience participation without anyone having to come up to the front. (You can
try this on Zoom, too.) One, ask everyone to cross their legs. Two, ask them to ‘draw’ the
number 6 in the air in front of them. Three, ask them to rotate the crossed leg in clockwise
circles, while also ‘drawing’ the number 6. People laugh—most can’t do it.




What does this exerise have to do with infographics? Nothing.That’s the point.What you have
done is to have engaged your audience, perhaps even literally made people sit up, and listeners
need the occasional break from your intense talk about numbers and zero baselines. Give
them a short vacation from your lecture.

One of the best examples of a live 3-d graphic that I’ve seen is part of the filmed version of
David Byrne’s American Utopia, his theater piece which combines songs with social commen-
tary. During the show, Byrne demonstrates the percentage of people who vote in US state and
local elections. He turns the cameras away from the stage to face the audience, and shines a
strip of light on 20% of them. The other 80% of the audience is visible, but in shadow.
134 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Byrne’s demonstration is a striking example of how few people vote in state and local races.
Pointing to the darkened audience he says ‘I guess you guys just don’t care,’ then adds that we
all ought to do better in presidential elections, too, when only about 55% of eligible voters
bother to go to the polls.

Keep these ideas in mind
You may never intend to involve your audiences in the kind of theatrical things I’ve attempted,
but here are a few things to remember when making presentations.

Plan a beginning and an end to the speech. Famous quotes or sayings can be good
openers and enders, but using a joke just for the sake of making people laugh isn’t a good idea.
(See John’s point above.)

Use notes, not a script. It’s OK to glance down at your notes, but if you have written
out your whole speech you’ll be looking down all the time, and it’s off-putting for the audience.
There may be parts of your speech that you do have to read—an important lengthy quote, for
instance, that you want to get exactly right—and in that case, pick up your notes so people
can see you are reading from them.

Rehearse by yourself, and constantly, while you construct the presentation. The
order of your images will affect the words you speak, so do speak them, out loud. I guarantee
there will be something you’ll want to change.

Rehearse again! Once you have finished compiling the whole presentation, time yourself
reading it while you advance the slides. Nothing is more frustrating for you and the organizers
than a presenter who goes over the allotted time. Rehearsal will also let you know where
you can speed things up in case you get questions during your speech that might make it go
longer than you planned.

Use fewer—far fewer—written words on your slides, and think about what you want to
get across more as spoken words. (It’s called a speech, folks!) The point of a live presentation
is that you and your voice are right there in front of people; if you just read your slides, the
audience will be confused about whether they should read what’s on the screen, or listen to
you reading it.

Check the room. Have a look around. If it’s a conference with multiple speakers, listen to
those who come before you. Reiterating ideas that your fellow speakers have made is not only
respectful to them, but it also helps the audience understand both your ideas and others’—
even if you disagree. Listening to the presenters before you helps you gauge the overall feeling
of the attendees, and if you intend to ask some of them to join you up at the front, you can
identify likely candidates from their questions and reactions before it’s your time to speak.
                                                                      JOYFUL PRESENTATIONS 135



Check in early with the audiovisual team (if there is one) to make sure that your
computer systems are compatible with the conference’s. That way, you’ll start on time, and be
relaxed about the technology. Preparation is important, especially if you are nervous about
public speaking, which most of us are.

Stand up! … next to your computer, not behind it. If the conference is configured with a
table and chair for speakers, don’t sit there. You will be a much more engaging speaker if you
stand and move around the space a bit. And you have arms! Did your parents tell you not to
point? This is the time to point! It’s like adding a label to an important element in a graphic
that you want your audience to take note of. At one of his wonderful presentations, I saw
Hans Rosling use the ultimate pointer to interact with his slides—a 10-foot long stick. It was
funny, and very effective.

Don’t let PowerPoint seduce you into using flashy special effects. I use the program
all the time, and I like it, but I only occasionally use its fancy wipes, animations, and 3-d font
effects. Just as you should use color sparingly in infographics—color code your graphics to
highlight or emphasize information, never use color to decorate them—think of PowerPoint
effects in the same way. A deliberate avoidance of special effects however, shouldn’t stop you
from including animated clips that add information and make presentations lively.


An aside about PowerPoint (or Keynote, or any other presentation program). Many
conferences are now virtual, as a result of the Covid pandemic, and presentations are made
over Zoom, which is fast becoming the generic name (think Xerox) for all remote meetings.
I suspect that when things are back to normal, many conferences will remain virtual, or be a
hybrid of in-person and Zoomed-in.

For two reasons, remote presentations are a minefield for lecturers. First, the fact that you
can’t see the audience is a bigger problem than you might suspect. When you can see the
people sitting in front of you, you can see whether or not they understand what you are saying,
and you adjust your presentation accordingly. There’s an unmistakable connection between a
live audience and the speaker—laughs, groans at bad puns, applause, snoring—all feedback that
helps and informs the way you talk. During a virtual presentation, you are speaking into a void;
your listeners are invisible, muted, and separated from one another.


The second part of the minefield is technology. I’d say that half of all presentations I have
either given, or listened to, have included some sort of technical glitch. As I write this, I have
just finished remotely presenting at a hybrid conference—part with live presentations in front
of an audience, and with my part remotely phoned-in. Despite a rehearsal in advance of the
event with the audiovisual technicians, two-thirds of the way through my session half of my
screen was inexplicably covered with an irrelevant file. Neither the technical team nor anyone
in the audience was able to help me; I could hear people shouting contradictory suggestions.
136 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



After a few flailing minutes, the meeting host wisely shut me down.

The moral: you can never do too much planning for the technical part of a presentation. And
in the same way that I make friends with the AV people at in-person lectures, you should try
to contact remote digital helpers, and tell them about any problems you may have had with
previous events. Perhaps more importantly, if you are in the Apple camp, as I am, find out
if they are as conversant with Apple products as they are with PCs. AV people seem to be
mostly in the latter camp, at least at digital conferences.


Handouts. The idea that slides can have a dual purpose—to be both the presentation
and also a leave-behind—is wrong. It’s more work to make a separate document that you
can leave behind, tailored to a reader (instead of a listener/viewer), but it makes sense. Use
both mediums—your live presentation and a written leave-behind document—to their best
advantage; they are not interchangeable. This is the graphic handout I left behind after the
million, billion, trillion presentation.




‘The End’ … is better wording for your last slide; it’s more direct, a bit funny, and less abrupt
than ‘Questions?’ And please thank your audience in person—say it out loud—rather than
writing it on a slide. It’s much friendlier.

Next: Science graphics.
                            JOYFUL PRESENTATIONS 137




b   r   e   a   t   h   e
                                                                                            139




                             Science: serious fun



Scientists are serious people.They don’t want their work to be trivialized by graphic designers.
I understand. For a diagram running in Time about interferons—proteins that induce resistance
to viral infections in nearby cells—we sent the finished piece to the scientist who was featured
in the article. He was horrified that his life’s work was going to be illustrated with a comic
strip, and in Time magazine, no less.

Interferons are messenger RNA, so I had drawn Paul Revere riding from one cell to another,
warning the second cell that a virus was coming, and that it should put up a defense.




We published the graphic (above) anyway, since the scientist could find nothing wrong with the
facts, however much he objected to the way they were presented. After the magazine came
out, he got letters from his colleagues saying in effect ‘now we understand your work,’ and he
generously told us. (We got letters like that from readers, too.)
140 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




           A VISIT TO A BLACK HOLE




So what if it looked like a comic? Time’s Art Director Walter Bernard allowed me to mess with
the magazine’s page design and draw an real comic for a graphic about black holes (above).The
juxtaposition of a freewheeling comic-book style with Time’s restrained and gridded structure
made the piece all the more—dare I say it—joyful.

Years later, Jen Christiansen, graphics director at Scientific American, contacted me about
another black hole story. I asked her to tell me about that commission:
‘When I read the preliminary draft of an article by Adam Brown for the February 2015 issue of
Scientific American, Nigel Holmes popped immediately to my mind as a great artist for the project.
The title “Can We Mine a Black Hole?” sounded straightforward enough: Intriguing, and presumably
on the technical and expository end of things. A title like that suggests that complex physics diagrams
or equations may follow. But the deck—a few lines of display text directly below the headline—
                                                                                   SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 141



opened the door to whimsy. “Let’s say some
future civilization wanted to get energy out
of a black hole. The first step would be to
build a space elevator that defies the laws
of physics.”

‘I wanted graphics that would match the tone
of the deck. An imprecise and playful vibe
would reinforce that the article was centered
on a thought experiment. We weren’t
showing objects that were currently being
built and tested. I was after something more
in the spirit of scientists jotting down ideas
and doodling in a notebook while thinking
through the hypothetical possibilities. Nigel’s
illustrations, (right), provided an informal
and welcoming gesture to non-scientist and
scientist readers alike, thanks to his content
choices and style.’

I don’t know if Jen ever saw the Time
comic, but she told me she had seen two
more recent graphics that made her think
of me for her black hole assignment. One
was for The New York Times, a series of
hand-drawn illustrations about the Higgs
boson, and the other a collaboration with
the theoretical physicist Michio Kaku for
the 100th anniversary of Einstein’s Special
Theory of Relativity in Discover magazine.
(See one of the spreads on the next page.)




Some of the art for The New York Times’ Higgs boson story, describing the Higgs field first like molasses and
then using a metaphor of a field of snow. On the Times website, the whole sequence of 20 drawings were
beautifully animated by Xaquín G.V.
142 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS
SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 143
144 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Design Director Michael Mrak and editors Stephen Petranek and David Grogan thought that a
collaborative effort—text and pictures welded together—rather than a long article illustrated
with diagrams, would be good way to celebrate Einstein. And it would be an interesting change
of pace for the magaine. It was a delight working with Michio, who willingly gave up a much
easier job for him—writing a 4,000-word article—and instead engaged with a designer who
knew next to nothing about his subject. After lots of back-and-forth between us, he selflessly
ended up writing what amounted to extended captions for my graphics, (previous spread).

Working directly with scientists who really know their stuff, and who are able to stand back
and look at it from the point of view of a reader who probably doesn’t know anything about
                                                                        SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 145



it, is a gift to infographic designers. Jennifer Dionne, a scientist at Stanford University, was to
be featured in Stanford magazine for her work on nanoscale systems. Stanford alumni are
probably the smartest readers a designer will come across, meaning that they might not need
much help understanding Jennifer’s experiments. Still, I couldn’t resist trying to explain how
very small nanoparticles are. As printed in the magazine the hand in the diagram (left) is life
size, so the reader can put their own hand right there. It gives a general idea of the size of a
nanometer but doesn’t quite work; as the text guiltily notes, the dot made by the pencil is still
500,000 times too large! For the rest of the graphic I tried, with Jennifer’s helpful editing, to
make her complicated work available to laypeople—even if they were smart!

Explaining science to children
You know, it isn’t that different from explaining science to non-children—sometimes called
adults. (Although ‘adult’ is more about age than intelligence or attitude; I’m just an older child.)

Considering our audience of children—and ‘older’ children—in this way is good because a
fundamental explanation of anything should go back to the basics of any subject; it should
assume no prior knowledge. Graphics aimed at children might look brighter and more jolly
than stuff made for an adult audience, but the facts should always be clear. Several infographical
people have had a go: I am a book. I am a portal to the universe by designer Stefanie Posavec
and data journalist Miriam Quick is a clever kaleidoscope of images and words about what
Planet Earth is made of, and how a book—the actual book that you are holding while you
read it—relates to all the science described. In the small print at the back, Stefanie and Miriam
detail the math and science behind the concepts they have so brilliantly and simply illustrated.
146 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Simon Rogers, the data editor at Google, has written a great series of books for children,
collaborating with illustrators and infographic designers—Peter Grundy on the Human Body;
Jennifer Daniel, Space!; Nicholas Blechman, Animal Kingdom; Studio Muti, Technology.

A much earlier information-filled series for children was written and illustrated by Holling
Clancy Holling. Along with an adventure story (including Tree in the Trail, 1942, and Seabird,
1948), that is straightforwardly told in text, Holling fills his pages with realistic full-color
paintings of the action, and black-and-white charts, maps and diagrams in the margins that
explain everything from Indian canoe-making, to how river locks, volcanoes, and covered
wagons work; how to read tree rings; and the biology of embryonic cell division. The books
are science, art and adventure all in one package.

Marie Neurath continued the work of her husband Otto’s Isotype Institute after his death
in 1945. As well as doing ground-breaking graphic work in Africa, Marie created books for
children that explained aspects of science, and how people lived in the past. The Visual History of
Mankind, Wonders of the Modern World, The Wonder World of Nature and other series, produced
until the early 1970s, used the same visual principles of clarity and color-coding that Otto and
his team had advocated from the start of the Vienna Method.

This is a not at all a comprehensive list of books about science for children; they are the ones
I admire. Each has lessons for information designers about how to explain ideas in a clear
manner. All are beautifully designed and are well worth reading for the fun and for the lessons.

I’ve written two books for children. They are stories with lots of explanatory diagrams. The
first one is about Pinhole, a tiny person—almost invisible (an arrow shows you where he is).
In one adventure, Pinhole goes for a ride on the back of a insect, (below).
                                                                      SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 147



In one chapter of Art Blob, the title character (below) makes cheese (it doesn’t turn out well).




An edible infographic As part of a course for
professional infographic designers that ran from 1984 to
1993 at the Rhode Island School of Design, one exercise
was to devise a way to explain a difficult subject to a child,
in front of the class.There was no limit to how this could
be done: any way the explanation was presented was fair
game. It brought out the theatrical side of the students,
and provided a relief from intense chart- and map-making;
and it broadened the idea of what an infographic could
be. My favorite piece was an explanation of why a child’s
mother would need special care and attention when she
came home from the hospital after an operation to fix
a slipped disc. The students, one playing the father, and
one the child, made a model of a spine out of a hot dog,
donuts and cheese slices. Since the construction was
flexible, you could see how a piece of cheese, standing
in for the errant disc, was awkwardly squeezed between
two donut-vertebrae, causing pain. Everyone laughed, but
we got the point. Naturally, the ‘father and child’ finished
their presentation by eating the whole thing.
148 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



The science of laughing and smiling.

                         Before I attempt to explain this, two caveats: (1) I am not a scientist,
                         and (2) My wife groans at my jokes—but then sometimes laughs
                         because they are so bad. When I’m away from home making a
                         presentation, I often give the audience a card, (left), to hold up to their
                         face. I would then take a photo of the assembled group and email it
                         home to let Erin know that at least the audience thought I was funny.

On the back of the card there was a brief
explanation of why smiling is good for you.
The first graphic on the back of the card was
the Smile-o-graph©, but it wasn’t that funny.
Who needs a joke when there’s plenty of real
science about laughter and smiling, and jokes?

For instance, Scott Weems’ revealing and
hilarious book Ha! The Science of When We
Laugh and Why goes into great detail about
how a region in the front of the brain—the anterior cingulate—monitors our responses
to humor, particularly jokes. And the psychologist Richard Wiseman has written extensively
about jokes; in 2001, he started a quest to find the world’s funniest. 40,000 jokes were sent
in to his project website, LaughLab. They were rated by more than 350,000 people from 70
countries, and a winner was proclaimed.

Five years after that study, Wiseman found a slightly different version of the winning joke that
was written by Spike Milligan in the 1950s and was first told on the radio by two members of
the Goon Show—those funny people cited among my early influences. This is Milligan’s version
of the World’s Funniest Joke:
     Michael Bentine: I just came in and found him lying on the carpet there.
     Peter Sellers: Oh, is he dead?
     Bentine: I think so.
     Sellers: Hadn’t you better make sure?
     Bentine: Alright. Just a minute.
     Sound of two gunshots.
     Bentine: He’s dead.—transcribed from Richard Wiseman’s blog.
(Yes, I had the same reaction: that’s the World’s Funniest Joke?)

This book isn’t about jokes, and why you ‘get’ them, or don’t. What interests me is the kind of
good feeling that flows over you when you smile. All sorts of experts from ‘happiness gurus’
to a TED talker have weighed in on the benefits of smiling.
                                                                        SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 149



This is my take on the complexity of the simple act of smiling.

First, the mechanical part.We have more than 30 facial muscles that pull the face into different
expressions. When we smile, our zygomaticus muscles (major and minor), and our risorius
muscles are triggered by a neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, that pulls the mouth up and back,
while our orbicularis oculi muscles narrow our eyes. While we can control the zygomaticus and
risorius muscles, we cannot activate the orbicularis oculi at will, and if we try to, it leads to an
insincere, or fake smile. In 1862, Guillaume-Benjamin Duchenne de Boulogne demonstrated
this difference between a ‘real’ smile, when the mouth is tugged up and the eyes are narrowed
—the Duchenne Smile—and a ‘fake’ smile, when we force a grin (a non-Duchenne smile).

Second, the chemical part. When we smile, the brain releases three hormones: dopamine,
endorphins, and serotonin. Dopamine, known as the feel-good, and ‘reward’ neurotransmitter,
is a chemical messenger which is released from the hypothalamus during pleasurable situations.
Endorphins, released by the pituitary gland, are morphine-like chemicals that produce euphoria.
Serotonin is an anti-depressant and stress reducer responsible for feelings of satisfaction and
contentment.

Are there too many obscure medical terms here? Seems like the perfect place for me to shut
up and draw you a friendly diagram—it’s a more science-y version of the card I handed out
when speaking at conferences.
150 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



By the way, to make serotonin, you need tryptophan—an essential bio-chemical precursor—
and a great place to get it is from cheese. That’s why those of us who love cheese cannot get
enough of it—we are addicted. It goes like this:




All the smiling muscle stuff can be stopped cold by injecting Botox into the faces of people
hoping to appear ageless. Botox freezes the muscles so your wrinkles don’t deepen over time.
It’s a neurotoxin that attaches itself to nerve endings, and when it does, acetylcholine—which
normally triggers muscle contractions—doesn’t work. In extreme cases, you can’t smile. You
can’t frown either. Some patients are happy with that; it makes them appear happier.

Scientists who study these things say that our brains can be tricked into thinking that humor
is present by forcing a smile—that non-Duchenne Smile—assuming our ability to smile at all
hasn’t been botoxed away. Apparently, muscle movement by itself can trigger the release of
happiness hormones. It follows that when we obey a photographer’s ‘smile, please,’ at least
we’ll feel good when the camera clicks, even if we feel a bit silly doing it.
                                                                      SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 151



Smiling is contagious, like yawning. It’s the work of mirror neurons in the brain which fire when
we see someone yawn…




                                     … or smile.




              Perhaps that’s why Danish-American comedian Victor Borge said
                    ‘A smile is the shortest distance between people.’

                             A fitting end to this science lecture.




    Next pages: a collection of sciency graphics from magazines, books, and newspapers.
152 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




When I showed my sketches for this graphic to editors at Time, they turned it round, assuming I’d handed it
to them upside down. They had their way in the end, anyway, writing a subhead to make sure readers didn’t
think the magazine had made a mistake. The piece was created in 1981, before we had computers in the art
department, and it’s a testament to the careful work of Time’s layout artists, who had to measure and specify
all those line-lengths around the mechanical arm, by hand.
                    SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 153




I live in Connecticut, the state that includes Lyme,
     the small coastal town where the disease was
first identified. I’ve had it twice, so I was happy to
find out more about how it gets passed on, doing
       this graphic for The New York Times, in 1996.
154 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




You’ve already seen several graphics that first
appeared in the ‘How It Works’ section of Attaché,
the in-flight magazine of USAir (later, US Airways;
later still, merged with American Airlines). As bored
(or nervous) travelers flipped through the stuff in the
seat pocket in front of them, we tried to hold their
attention for a few minutes with fun facts.

The graphic above from 2002, and seven on the
following pages are all from that monthly commission,
too. Writer Jim Collins sent me his text weeks before
publication so that I could either expand on his ideas,
or add my own, but never just parrot what he was            The graphics were often tied to the time of
saying. Art Director Holly Holliday allowed me almost     the year (for instance, Fall, bottom right); or to
complete freedom. A dream job!                               an event in the news—the release of new
                                                                          US currency designs (top right).

                                                            Many of the graphics included the idea of a
                                                           ‘Greek chorus’ of characters, commenting on,
                                                                     or making a joke about the piece.
                                                                                            SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 155


                    USA100USA100USA100
                   USA100USA100USA100
                  USA100USA100USA100
             USA100USA100USA100
               USA100USA100USA100
             USA100USA100USA100 U N
               USA100USA100USA100I T                                                    0
             USA100USA100USA100                                                    10




                                            E
               USA100USA100USA100    S                                         A




                                            D
             USA100USA100USA100
               USA100USA100USA100
                                       TA
                                          TE                               S
             USA100USA100USA100                                        U




                                                S
               USA100USA100USA100
                                                                       0




                                                O
                                                                    10
                                                    A




                                                F
                                                                A
                                                            S
                                                        U




        US
           A1 USUSUS A1A1
      US US 00USA100   0000
         A1 A1
    US US 00US00USA100USUSUS   A1
      A1 A1               A1 A10000US
  US US 00US00USA100A1 USA100US   US A1
    A1 A1              00US 00 A1   A1 00
             A100A1 USA1
US US 00US00US                      00 00
  A1 A1             00US 00A100
           A100A1 USA1
 US 00US00US             A1
    A100 A1 A1  US00US 00 00
        US 00US00USA100A1
           A100 A1 A1     00
               US 00 00
                  A100
156 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Above and below,
from Attaché, 1999.
                                             SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 157




From Attaché, 1998. Occasionally I played
with the graphic architecture of the page;
here, the right-hand page rule becomes a
human part of the illustration.
158 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



From Attaché, 2002.
Like the microwave
graphic, this one also
gets the right-hand
page-rule in on the
action, this time as a
piano string.
                           SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 159




From Attaché, 2004.
In this one, the ‘little
people’ are adding to,
and explaining the
information more than
just making comments.
160 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




                                   From Attaché, 2005.
                               Close to home: I’ve been
                          wearing glasses since age 13.
                             (That’s a little self-portrait
                                          in the middle.).
                                        SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 161




A detail of a graphic adapted from
Instant Expert, 2014. The book
was how to be everything—from a
bookbinder, a bouncer, a brewer, to a
Casanova, and here, a food taster.
162 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Above, for Northwestern (University)
Magazine, 2011. (Art Director Christina
Senese)
                                           Right, an 8.5 x 11-inch factsheet about HPV (human
                                           papillomavirus) and cervical cancer for the American
                                          Social Health Association, that folded down to a small
                                          pocketable size. It was freely available in health clinics.
SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 163
164 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




Adapted from Wordless Diagrams: how to
do your own test for breast lumps.




              In 2006, Eric Seidman, the Art Director of AARP Bulletin, and I proposed a feature, Wise Guy,
              that would run across the bottom of several consecutive pages. Composed of lists, small
              charts and facts, it added info to the main story above it on the pages. Shown here are two
              panels from the prototype. Another good idea that never got into print!
            SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 165




For a Time magazine special issue on
 medicine. (Art Director Marty Golon)
166 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




                             Stanford Magazine, 2005.
                          (Art Director Bambi Nicklen).
                             SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 167




From Business 2.0
(Art Director Susan Casey)
168 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS
                                                                                SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 169


                                                                                       For National Geographic’s
                                                                                       Green Guide, published in
                                                                                       2008, this diagram shows
                                                                                       the process of recycling
                                                                                       paper from collection to
                                                                                       being made back into
                                                                                       paper. (Art Director, Marty
                                                                                       Ittner.)




Left, for an article in Stanford Magazine about David Hockney’s theories of how old
master paintings may have been created with mechanical devices that helped artists
make accurate renderings, I used old-fashioned cross-hatching (and font) to give the
diagrams a look that somewhat matched the period. (Art Director Bambi Nicklen)
170 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS




A final piece from Attaché
magazine, 2000. As with
other Attaché graphics,
the Greek chorus chimed
in—this time I’m let off
the hook for simplifying the
information. The magazine
was intended for casual
readers, not a manual for
their car!
SCIENCE: SERIOUS FUN 171




             OK, that’s enough.
                                                                                                  173




                                       Chartoons



To the Editor,TIME Magazine. Dear Sir, with your 7 and 14 April [1980] issues, Holmes’ charts have
gone from being merely puzzling and ignorable to indecipherable and downright annoying. I have long
since decided to ignore Holmes’ cute charts, but your permitting him to indulge his fancy in the pages
of TIME is resulting in less information for my money … I would appreciate it if you would allay one
suspicion—is Holmes the publisher’s son-in-law?

To the Editor, TIME Magazine. Dear Sir, it has become increasingly obvious that Nigel Holmes has
aspirations toward the field of cartooning. I hope the January 19 [1981] issue satisfies his urge and
he can get back to charts and graphs and leave the horsies and witches and all the other funny little
creatures to the boys at Disney Studios.

Four million people read Time magazine when I worked there. There were bound to be some
of them who hated my work! (I did get nice letters, too.)

A chart about the price of diamonds was the
best answer to why it would be hopeless for
me to have ‘aspirations toward the field of
cartooning.’ Everyone who saw it thought it
was Marilyn Monroe, who sang Diamonds are a
Girl’s Best Friend in the movie Gentlemen Prefer
Blondes. But I had drawn Carol Channing, the
star of the Broadway play of the same name, in
1949. Here are my sketches and the final piece.
I guess it didn’t look like either actress!
174 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                          Is that an elephant in the room? If you are a seasoned infographic or
                          data visualization designer, you are probably familiar with the writings
                          of Edward Tufte, and you may have read that he referred to the
                          Diamonds chart as chartjunk in his 1990 book Envisioning Information.
                          He’s entitled to his opinion, of course. And among the roughly 1,000
                          charts that I did at Time, some of them were over-illustrated.

But I believe that none of my charts or graphics trivialized the data, which was scrupulously
checked by wonderful fact-checking researchers, principally Noel McCoy and Deborah Wells.
Tufte simply misunderstood my audience.

He was writing from an academic standpoint, and he urged his readers that his ‘rules’ were
universal and should always be used—when making graphics for any audience. I was making
charts for the non-specialist readers of a general-interest magazine, and I knew that Time’s
readers might not be completely versed in all aspects of business, or medicine, or science,
and that they appreciated a little visual help in understanding those concepts. That was not
chartjunk, it was charthelp, as was demonstrated by academic papers published years later. Of
course, if the illustrated parts of a chart distract from an understanding of the data, then the
chart fails. However, if the illustrated parts of a chart help a reader to (1) instantly see what
the chart is about, and (2) offer pointers as to its meaning, then those additions are not junk.

I contacted Tufte in 1990 after the publication of Envisioning
Information, but did not get a reply. Now, some 30 years later,
in an effort to give him an opportunity to comment on what
I have said here, I sent him the text you are reading here as
a courtesy. Again, he did not reply. Elephant leaves the room.

The American philosopher John Dewey said this about scientists, but I think it applies to
infographic rule-makers: ‘We are not called upon to defend them, for their work is in the past; we
are not called upon to attack them, for our work is in the future.’ (Much of my work is in the past,
so that would apply to me, too, if I had issued a set of rules about chartmaking.)

                                                                         The best compliment I ever
                                                                         got was to be included in
                                                                         National Lampoon’s parody
                                                                         of Time. The fake charts
                                                                         had this lovely credit:
                                                                         Mobil Holmes. They were
                                                                         drawn by Philip A. Scheuer,
                                                                         a contributing artist
                                                                         at the Lampoon.
                                                                              CHARTOONS 175




I’ve been asked to make faux charts, too. In 2005, Airbus unveiled the A380. The New York Times
invited me to imagine the emergency instructions for such a large plane (above).

Also in The New York Times, for Father’s Day in 1999,
the Style Section Art Director Richard Aloisio sent me a
story about a daughter and son thinking about what to
give their dad that wasn’t the typical Father’s Day gift—
another boring tie.

Dad was an inventor of sorts. All I had to do was to
diagram his kids’ description of a self-operated cat toilet
that their Dad had invented. I included a tie, anyway, just
for cliché’s sake.
176 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



From 2013 to 2020, Robert Priest and Grace Lee wrote and designed Eight by Eight, a magazine
about football (soccer), and they allowed me to have some diagrammatic fun within its
beautifully crafted pages. For a piece about proposed ways to improve referees’ calls about
handling dubious goals, I added this silly bit at the end of my otherwise factual graphic.




Something I didn’t mention about live performances was that at the end
of a lecture I often sang a song, usually with my words about graphics that
had something to do with the talk, set to a well-known tune. One day in
the bathroom, I had noticed that my Dry Idea deodorant had a price sticker
pasted onto the container exactly on top of the letter Y in Dry. Dr. Idea
was born, and sung, rather poorly, on the stage at Stanford University. But
there was a point: the good doctor will help you find ideas in surprising
places. Keep an open mind. (By the way, if you open yourself up to such
humiliation—singing when you aren’t that good—the audience mostly loves
it. Then they tell you to stick to your day job.)

                     The pie chart comes in for some hefty ribbing in the infographic world,
                     particularly on Twitter. Whatever you think of the pie as a charting
                     method—me: it’s good, as long as there are no more than six or seven
                     parts, and they add up to a hundred—pies are all around us. (And should
                     always be round.) These are my own iterations of images that make fun
                     of pies. I don’t know who to acknowledge, but thank you for the smiles.

                     And we know it’s good for you to smile, because science says so. (See
                     previous chapter.)
                                                                             CHARTOONS 177




Sometimes an infographic can look like a joke but contains real, serious data. Look at this
bar chart, (above), about greenhouse-gas emitters. It was designed by Jason Forrest, Gabrielle
Merite and Gergo Varga for McKinsey & Company. OK, it breaks the ‘rules’ of chart-making:
three-dimensional bars with tops that fuzz exact data points; unequal bar widths (and how!)
…who cares—the point is very clear. I love it.

In my brief history of pictorial infographics in Chapter 2, I’m critical of abstract data
visualizations that are worthy data representations but are overly complex. In print, I feel
some visualizations lack the editing needed to help readers and users understand why the
information is relevant to them and their own lives. In conference presentations I had fun with
the difference between data visualization, represented by The Data-Rich Porcupine (manylinus
bewilderus), and infographics, represented by The Edited Zebra (infograficus understanda). The
idea was to acknowledge the difference, while joking about it. Perhaps both camps—the
shaggy porcupines and the organized zebras—take ourselves a bit too seriously.
                                                                                                  179




                                     Don’t do this!



It’s confession time. I have made some awful graphics. So rather than point the finger at anyone
else’s less-than-excellent charts, I’ll point it at myself. Why? Because everyone has blind spots,
and sometimes, in an effort to make a point, I’ve crossed a line. Doubtless eager, critical
formalists will pounce on these examples and say: ‘See, he does make chartjunk.’ To which I
reply, you are right (some of the time). These charts from Time are a don’t-do-this warning.

Please don’t overdo the illustration.
I was trained as an illustrator, but this ‘illustration’ got in the way of the data ’Nuff said.
180 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                     I wish people at
                                     Time had spoken
                                     up against this
                                     horror! (left)




Please don’t
perpetuate stereotypes
Just avoid them. During the
late 1970s and early 80s gas
shortage in America, people
were angry with OPEC. At first,
I showed Arabs running up the
price of gas. Then, when the
crisis was over and prices fell in
1982, I was happy to show them
in trouble. I am surprised that
there was only mild criticism
of my racist ethnic caricatures
at the time. They were political
cartoons that did include some
numbers, but they also reflected
the angry feelings of motorists
in the US at the time.

Other stereotypes I try to
avoid include assuming—and
graphically depicting—nurses as
women; all doctors as men; and
that anything to do with women
should be in shown pink, and
with men, in blue.
                                                                             DON’T DO THIS! 181



Please don’t try to make a picture out of everything.
I’ve already suggested that clichés to show the ups and downs of the stock market as
mountain ranges and rollercoasters should be ditched. Here’s my worst idea (from the mid-
70s):     America as a fetus. Thankfully, enough people at Time loudly objected as my rough
sketch made the editorial rounds; the finished piece did not run in the magazine.




The problem is this: an infographic causing moral outrage, one that steps on religious opinions,
or puts forward a political and moral viewpoint, such as the abortion map, should be stopped. I
hold strong views, but this was beyond the pale. However, if a graphic merely offends people’s
aesthetic sense, like the slug, it’s just an ugly thing, and people turn the page. You, the artist,
have to be the judge of when to restrain yourself.

Since I can never resist a tidbit of explanation when there’s an interesting one, the metaphor
‘beyond the pale’—meaning something that’s outside society’s boundaries of acceptable
behavior—is derived from the Latin word for a pointed wooden post lined up with others to
form a fence that you should not cross. Don’t go beyond the pale.

Please don’t think that dressing up charts, especially pies, with 3-d effects will
make your graphics more joyful.
Whenever a client, or editor, suggests that making a chart three-dimensional will help it to
‘jump off the page,’ please say no. I like pies, but I want them to stay on the page so I can read
them accurately.
182 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Please don’t forget to have fun.
This is perhaps the most important don’t. If you enjoy what you are doing, it will shine through
in your work, and connect you to your audience.

                    I’m not sure where I read this, but it’s a lovely motto:
                                       Be reasonable.
                                          Be kind.
                                         Be funny.



                                  Thank you for reading.
                         Now get going and make joyful infographics!
                                                                                                 185




                                                                              Appendix
                                                                          (It’s usually on the right.)




Contrary to popular thought, the appendix is not where your body shunts all the bad stuff it
doesn’t need (cherry pips, swallowed gum). But why it’s there at all is a bit of a mystery. One
theory: evolution has rendered it useless. The appendix gets preemptively removed in case
you get a pain in your tummy, and certainly when you get a pain in your tummy. I’m grateful
that the word surgeons (aka editors) haven’t removed this one, which has some stuff in it that
might seem to have little to do with this book, but which is fun nevertheless.



Random images
I used a lot of adhesive-backed
sheets of Letratone and Zipatone
in my artwork before the Mac gave
me all the dots, squiggles, and tints
I could dream of. I tried to match
the half-tone dot screen of what-
ever publication I was appearing
in so that the grays in my graphics
looked the same as the gray tones
in photographs. But sometimes,
for a different effect, I deliberate-
ly used a larger dot screen. And
there were other patterns avail-
able; I liked the wavy lines. When I
was asked to do a simple black and
white line drawing for a coloring
book I used a whole sheet of Le-
tratone’s undulating lines to stand
in for very neatly plowed furrows.
I wonder if anyone colored in any-
thing other than the tractor?
186 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Doing something other than your infographics day job can be both relaxing and invigorating.
There are a couple of non-deadline things I do that may or may not influence my graphic work.
One is making (almost daily) collages. These often start with a scrap of color or a shape I see
in the daily newspaper, and are generally finished within a few minutes. It’s a bit like the sur-
realists’ idea of automatic art: you gather a few scraps of paper; arrange them into some sort
of shape, usually abstract, without much thought; see what’s there, and glue the pieces down.
That’s it. There’s no purpose to this activity, and few people see the results.




         A good substitute for the wavy lines of yore, (or at least of the
         previous page, made 50 years ago) is the pattern printed on the
         inside of some business envelopes. It softens the blow of a big bill
         if you can use the envelope it came in.
                                                                       APPENDIX 187




I like the contrast between roughly torn edges and sharp, cut ones.
This sort of exercise gives you a chance to widen your palette, with
colors you might not put together in information graphics, and also
to appreciate the importance of pure black.
188 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



                                                         When I was at art school, I loved the
                                                         physicality of lino- and wood-cut-
                                                         ting. Today, it’s just a hobby, but still
                                                         related to image-making. I made
                                                         a two-color lino cut of Sheemia,
                                                         a neighbor’s cat who came to vis-
                                                         it me most days and posed nicely
                                                         for photos while walking all over
                                                         my computer keyboard. Then, just
                                                         as abruptly as she had appeared
                                                         outside the door to the office, she
                                                         would go and sit by it, asking to
                                                         leave. Sheemia’s owner had young
                                                         children whose name for her was
                                                         Meatball; to me she was the sweet-
                                                         est and most welcome visitor, and
                                                         not a meatball at all.

Here she is again in a how-to-draw-an-icon-of-a-cat demo:

                                                                Don’t trace around a photo—it
                                                             looks more like an owl than a cat!
                                                                     To capture the essence of
                                                                     Sheemia, or anything, take
                                                                         Otto Neurath’s advice:
                                                                                 draw a profile
                                                                                  or silhouette.




Wooden toys
These are basically exercises in simplifying. The wood itself constrains what you are able to
do with it—unless you are an expert woodworker/carver—but you can use what might seem
like a limitation to make friendly toys for your kids (or grandkids).


                                                                                  An admiring nod
                                                                                  to information
                                                                                  designer Ladislav
                                                                                  Sutnar and artist
                                                                                  Joaquín Torres-
                                                                                  García. Both
                                                                                  made beautiful
                                                                                  wooden children’s
                                                                                  toys.
                                                                                  APPENDIX 189



An optical trick
Like the white arrow hidden between the e and the x in the Fedex logo, the white 8 inside the
eight of diamonds is a nice surprise when you first see it. (Afterwards, you can never unsee it.)
It works because the concavy diamond shapes on playing cards aren’t what a designer would
produce when asked to draw a diamond.




A card trick




Sleight of hand,
adapted from
Wordless Diagrams
190 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Lists
You’ve seen lists—not the bor-
ing ones, fun ones, many post-
ed by Neil Kaye on Twitter. For
instance, a list of palindromes
(Do geese see god?); a list of the
longest words with no repeated
letters (uncopyrightable); words
with vowels in alphabetical order
(abstemious); words with the most
of each letter (for i: indivisibility);
portmanteau words (racinos for
horse-racing casinos; quixonic for
odd-sounding music).

My favorite list is the
Shakespeare Insult Kit, (right).

Take one unflattering jibe from
each column and preface the re-
sult with ‘Thou.’ Endless fun.



More smiles
I took this picture in the Metro-
politan Museum of Art,
in New York. It’s a sculpture
from the 6th century BC.
                                 I had always understood that painted portraits of people
                                 never showed them smiling—it was too hard for the sitter
                                 to hold a smile for a long time. So what was going on with
                                 a smiling statue?

                                      The smile used by Greek sculptors is called the archaic
                                      smile, and it suggests that the person depicted was alive and
                                      ‘infused with a sense of well-being,’ according to that most
                                      excellent source, Wikipedia.

                                      There’s a whole room of Cypriot smiling statues like this
                                      one at the Met. As I’ve said elsewhere in this book, smiles
                                      are contagious. Test it for yourself.
                                                                                            APPENDIX 191



Accidental finds
I’m amused by the cyclists who whiz down the road outside our house, wearing ads
all over their shiny, spandexed bodies. I imagine they are fantasizing about riding in the
Tour de France, although the expressions on their faces don’t give the impression that it’s a
particularly enjoyable fantasy. I hope they are being paid to look like speeding billboards.

Personally, I don’t care to advertise what I’m wearing or carrying, so I avoid labels on t-shirts,
tote bags and anything else. But sometimes I get a little thrill when removing labels, (below),
and it reminds me to keep eyes open for accidental treasures.




      I have nothing against LLBean; I just           This is what’s on the back of that label:
      don’t want to be a walking ad for them.         blow it up and hang it in a gallery!



                                           Inconsistency
                                           I’ve lived and worked on both sides of the Atlantic, and
                                           I’m caught in the middle, initially mixed up about how to
                                           spell some words (humor, humour), or not knowing the
                                           American meaning of others. (I was upset when an art
                                           director told me a piece of mine was quite nice, because
                                           in England quite would mean do it again.) Or clinging
                                           to old pronunciation (tomarto), and not knowing what
                                           to call some punctuation (full stop for period; inverted
                                           commas for quotes), and so on.

Then I remember the wonderful Ralph Waldo Emerson quote ‘A foolish consistency is the
hobgoblin of little minds…’ I do not mean to say that text editors have little minds—it’s their
job to bring a certain consistency to text—but I am increasingly influenced by the opinions
of the American linguist John McWhorter, who regards language as ever-evolving. He says we
shouldn’t look down on colloquialisms or regard different ways of saying things as ‘wrong,’ and
he’s even making room for ‘like’ (currently used in every spoken sentence, it seems) when it
has nothing to do with actually liking anything. Mr. McWhorter urges us to think hard about
the use of words, and how they change over time.

I hope you are not offended by my grammatical (or graphical) inconsistency, but if you are, I’ll
take responsibility, requote Emerson and blame it on McWhorter!
                                                                                      READING LIST 193



Books, articles, links



Introduction
Thoughts on Design, Paul Rand, Wittenborn Schultz, New York, 1947
Ornament and Crime, Adolf Loos [lecture], https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ornament_and_Crime
Eyes on The News, Mario Garcia and Pegie Stark, Poynter Institute, St Petersburg, 1991
Nigel Holmes on Information Design, Steven Heller, Jorge Pinto Books, 2006




Influences
Holmes of the Humber, Tony Watts, Lodestar Books, London, 2009
The Complete Nonsense of Edward Lear, Faber and Faber, London, 1947
The Parrots, Edward Lear, The Complete Plates, Taschen, Cologne, 2018
Comic Drawing, W.W. (Bill) Sillince, Sir Isaac Pitman, London, 1950
Running Commentary, Fougasse, Methuen, London, 1941
Eadweard Muybridge,The Stanford Years, Exhibition Catalog, Stanford U., 1972
River of Shadows, Rebecca Solnit,Viking Penguin, New York, 2003
Eric Gill, Man of Flesh and Spirit, Malcolm Yorke, Universe Books, New York, 1982
Eric Gill, Fiona MacCarthy, Faber and Faber, London, 1989
The Goon Show, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Goon_Show
Monty Python’s Flying Circus, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monty_Python%27s_Flying_Circus
Civilisation, Kenneth Clark [TV series and related book] BBC, London, 1969-70
Rediscovering the Blazingly Bright Colors of Ancient Sculptures, Anika Burgess, Atlas Obscura, 2018
Gods in Color: Polychromy in the Ancient World, Vinzenz Brinkman & Others, Prestel Publishing, 2017




Pictorial data through the ages
Primitive Art, L. Adam, Pelican Books, London, 1942
From Cave Painting to Comic Strip, Lancelot Hogben, Chanticleer Press, New York, 1949
The Meaning of Art, Herbert Read, Faber & Faber, London, 1951
The Story of Art, E.H. Gombrich, Phaidon, London, 1960
Icon and Idea, Herbert Read, Schocken Books, New York, 1965
The Ascent of Man, Jacob Bronowski, Little Brown, Boston, 1973
The Creative Explosion, John E. Pfeiffer, Harper & Row, 1982
Altamira,The Origin of Art, Miguel Garcia Guinea, Madrid, 1977
The Mind in the Cave, David Lewis-Williams, Thames & Hudson, London, 2002
The Cave Painters, Gregory Curtis, Knopf, New York, 2006
Visual Language, Nigel Holmes, privately published, 2011
Sapiens, Yuval Noah Harari, Harper Perennial, New York, 2015
This is the Voice, John Colapinto, Simon & Schuster, New York, 2021
Behold the Stone Age, Robert Hughes, Time, 2/13/1995
194 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Homo Artisticus, Arthur Danto, The Nation, 2/20/1995
New Lascaux a Forgery? Alexander Cockburn, The Nation, 2/20/1995
Allegory of the Cave, letters from Danto and Cockburn, The Nation, 4/24/1995
Stone Age Menageries, Virginia Morell, Audubon, May/June, 1995
First Impressions, Judith Thurman, The New Yorker, 6/23/2008
Images of the Ice Age, Alexander Marshack, Archeology, July/August, 1995
Cross-Modality Information Transfer: A Hypothesis about the Relationship among
Prehistoric Cave Paintings, Symbolic Thinking, and the Emergence of Language,
   Shigeru Miyagawa, Cora Lesure,Vitor A Nóbrega, Frontiers in Psychology, 2/20/2018
Neanderthals, the World’s First Misunderstood Artists, Carl Zimmer, NY Times, 2/22/2018
Researchers Snuffle Up Rare Work of Cave Art, Becky Ferreira, NY Times, 1/19/2021
Before They Spoke,They Had to Listen, Sabrina Imbler, New York Times, 3/9/2021
Commercial and Political Atlas, William Playfair, 1786, London [Third edition (1801) available as a
   facsimile, with an introduction by Howard Wainer and Ian Spence,
   Cambridge University Press, New York, 2005]
Look at the World,The Fortune Atlas for World Strategy, Richard Edes Harrison, Fortune, 1944
Mr Beck’s Underground Map, Ken Garland, Capita; Transport, London, 1994
Cartography, Kenneth Field, Esri Press, Redlands, CA, 2018
Thematic Mapping, Kenneth Field, Esri Press, Redlands, CA, 2022
International Picture Language, Otto Neurath, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, London, 1936
Modern Man in the Making, Otto Neurath, Knopf, New York and London, 1939
Otto Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, Marie Neurath and Robert Cohen, D. Reidel Publishing Company,
   Dordrecht, Holland, 1973
Graphic Communication Through Isotype, University of Reading, J.A. Edwards and Michael Twyman,) 1975
Symbols for Education and Statistics, Gerd Arntz and Kees Broos, Mart, Spruijt Uitgever, 1979
Design Writing Research, Ellen Lupton and J Abbot Miller, Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 1996
Otto Neurath’s Universal Silhouettes, George Pendle, Shadows, Issue 24, 2006/7
Otto Neurath,The Language of the Global Polis, Nader Vossoughian, NAi, 2008
Lovely Language, Ed Annink and Max Bruinsma,Veenman, Rotterdam, 2008
The Transformer, Marie Neurath and Robin Kinross, Hyphen Press, London, 2009
Gerd Arntz, Graphic Designer, Ed Annink and Max Bruinsma, 010 Publishers, Rotterdam, 2010
Isotype, Design and Contexts, Christopher Burke, Eric Kindel, Sue Walker, Hyphen Press, London, 2013
From Hieroglyphics to Isotype, Otto Neurath, Hyphen Press, London, 2010
Image Factories: Kahn, Neurath, Various Editors, Spector Books, Leipzig, 2018
Reading Isotype, Ellen Lupton, Design Discourse, Chicago, 1989
Otto Neurath’s Rhetoric of Neutrality, Jae Young Lee,Visible Language, 2008
Principles and Practices of Neurath’s Picture Language, Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen, Visible Language 42.2, 2010
Isotype, Recent Publications, Robin Kinross, Hyphen Press, 2018
Gerd Arntz, lecture by Kees Broos, Moscow, 2018, Text published in Designabilities, dutchhistory.nl, 2019
Design Writing Research, Ellen Lupton and J. Abbott Miller, Princeton Architectural Press, New York,1996
Losing Propositions, Adam Kirsch, The New Yorker, 10/19/2020
Fritz Kahn, Uta and Thilo von Debschitz, Taschen, Cologne, 2013
1066 And All That, W.C. Sellar and R.J.Yeatman, Methuen, London, 1930
Dear Data, Stephanie Posavec and Giorgia Lupi, Princeton Architectural Press, 2016
I am a book. I am a portal to the universe, Stefanie Posavec and Miriam Quick, Particular Books, 2020
                                                                                    READING LIST 195




Nine Ways
Cruel Pies:The Inhumanity of Technical Illustrations, Sam Dragga and Dan Voss,
  Technical Communication, 8/2001
Connecting with the Dots, Jacob Harris, 1/15/2015, https://source.opennews.org/articles/connecting-dots/
Do No Harm Guide: Applying Equity Awareness in Data Visualization, Alice Feng & and Jonathan Schwabish,
   Urban Institute, 6/9/2021 https://www.urban.org/research/publication/do-no-harm-guide-applying-
   equity-awareness-data-visualization/
Six Ways to Bring Empathy into your Data, Alice Feng and Jonathan Schwabish, Nightingale, 6/10/2021
  https://nightingaledvs.com/author/alice-feng/
PolicyViz podcast episode 208 conversation between host John Schwabish and Frank Elavsky,
   12/28/2021 https://policyviz.com/podcast/episode-208-frank-elavsky/https://github.com/dataviza11y/
   resources#readme/
How to Lie with Statistics, Darrell Huff, WW Norton, New York, 1954
Connections, James Burke, Little Brown, London, 1978
The Cartoon Guide to Statistics, Larry Gonick and Woolcott Smith, HarperPerennial, New York, 1993
The Funny Little Man, Virginia Smith,Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1993
Visual Function, Paul Mijksenaar, 010 Publishers, Rotterdam, 1997
Wordless Diagrams, Nigel Holmes, Bloomsbury USA, 2005
The Laws of Simplicity, John Maeda, MIT Press, Cambridge, 2006
The Functional Art, Alberto Cairo, New Riders, 2013
The Truthful Art, Alberto Cairo, New Riders, 2016
Our Font is Made of People, Alberto Cairo & Scott Klein, opennews.org, 2/2/2018
How Charts Lie, Alberto Cairo, WW Norton, New York, 2019
Mortality, Richard Saul Wurman and Nigel Holmes, 2019
Info We Trust, R. J. Andrew, Wiley, Hoboken, 2019
How to Make the World Add Up, Tim Harford, Bridge Street Press, 2020
Visualizing with Text, Richard Brath, CRC Press, 2021
Better Data Visualizations, Jonathan Schwabish, Columbia U. Press. New York, 2021
In Germany, Karl Marx and Elvis Direct Traffic, Laura Kiniry, Atlas Obscura, 8/24/2021
The Science of Visual Data Communication:What Works, Steven L. Franconeri et al., Psychological Science
   in the Public Interest, 12/15/2021 https://journals.sagepub.com/stoken/default
Information Design Workbook, Kim Baer, Rockport, MA, revised and updated, 2021
The Timetables of History, Bernard Grun, Simon & Schuster, New York, 1991




Icons
Semantography (Blissymbolics), C.K. Bliss, Sydney, 1966
Shepherd’s glossary of graphic signs and symbols, Walter Shepherd, Dover, New York, 1971
Symbol Sourcebook, Henry Dreyfuss, McGraw-Hill, 1972
A Treasury of German Trademarks (Volumes One and Two), Leslie Cabarga,
  Art Direction Book Company, New York, 1982 & 1985
Designing Pictorial Symbols, Nigel Holmes with Rose DeNeve, Watson-Guptill, New York, 1985
196 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Pictogram Design, Yukio Ota, Kashiwashobo, Tokyo, 1987
Kanji Pictographix, Michael Rowley, Stone Bridge Press, Berkeley, 1992
Genesis, Juli Gudehus, Lars Müller Publishers, 1992
Niko! The Smiley Collection, Tota Enomoto, Shoeisha, Tokyo, 1993
Drawing to Explain, Nigel Holmes, 1998
Iconic Communication, Masoud Yazdani and Philip Barker (editors), Intellect Books, 2000
Information Design Journal, Vol. 10, no. 2, pp 133–143, Nigel Holmes, 2001
Wayfinding at Schiphol, Paul Mijksenaar, Amsterdam, 2008
In the Land of Invented Languages, Arika Okrent, Spiegel & Grau, New York, 2009
Who Made That? (Olympic Rings), Pagan Kennedy, New York Times Magazine, 7/15/2012
Who Made That? (Emoticon), Pagan Kennedy, New York Times Magazine, 11/25/2012
How the Valentine’s Day Heart Got its Shape, Olivia B. Waxman, Time.com, 2/13/2017
The Original Seed Pod That May Have Inspired the Heart Shape, Cara Giamo, Atlas Obscura, 2/13/2017
In Heraldry, Hearts Can Symbolize Everything from Lily Pads to Testicles, Eric Grundhauser,
  Atlas Obscura, 2/16/2017
Book from the Ground, Xu Bing, MIT Press, Cambridge, 2013
Emojis, Marty Allen, Dog’N’Bone Books, New York, 2015
The Story of Emoji, Gavin Lucas, Prestel Verlag, Munich, 2016
The Emoji Code, Vyvyan Evans, Picador, New York, 2017
LoCoS Visual Language for Global Communication, Yukio Ota, 2018
The Annex of Universal Languages, Edgar Walthert & Richard Niessen,
  The Palace of Typographic Masonry (poster), Netherlands, 2019
Debranding is the New Branding, Ben Schott, Bloomberg.com, 3/7/2021
I Heart Design, Steve Heller, Rockport, 2011




Joyful presentations
Better Presentations, Jonathan Schwabish, Columbia University Press, New York, 2017




Science
Give Me a Smile, Jonathan Kalb, The New Yorker, 1/12/2015
More to a Smile Than Lips and Teeth, Carl Zimmer, The New York Times, 1/25/2011
The Laughing Guru, Raffi Khatchadourian, The New Yorker, 8/30/2010
Ha!, Scott Weems, Basic Books, New York, 2014
For children:
Tree in the Trail, Holling Clancy Hollings, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1942
Seabird, Holling Clancy Hollings, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1948
Minn of the Mississippi, Holling Clancy Hollings, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1951
Pinhole, Nigel Holmes, Jorge Pinto Books, 2010
Art Blob, Nigel Holmes and Erin McKenna, AB Publish, 2020
Information Graphics; Understand the facts in the blink of an eye, by Simon Rogers, Big Picture Press.
  Series illustrators: Peter Grundy, Human Body, 2014; Nicholas Blechman, Animal Kingdom, 2014;
  Jennifer Daniel, Space, 2015; Studio Muti, Technology, 2017
                                                                             READING LIST 197



My Life Beyond Leukemia, Hey Gee and Rae Burremo, Mayo Clinic Press, 2021
My Life Beyond Bullying, Hey Gee and Ralph M., Mayo Clinic Press, 2021
Animal Joy, Nuar Alsadir, Graywolf Press, Minneapolis, 2022




Chartoons
How to Look at Iconography, Ad Reinhardt, PM (newspaper), New York, 1946
Envisioning Information, Edward Tufte, Graphics Press, Cheshire, 1990
National Lampoon Magazine (Time Parody), January 1984

Appendix
Dreyer’s English, Benjamin Dreyer, Random House, New York, 2019
Nine Nasty Words, John McWhorter, Avery, New York, 2021
Appendix, A History of, Dennis Duncan, Norton, New York, 2021
Book of Parts, Dennis Duncan and Adam Smyth, Oxford University Press, 2019
                                                                                              199



Thank you

This book would not have happened if Alberto Cairo hadn’t asked me to think about it, and
then introduced me to Elliott Morsia at CRC Press. Alberto was the best editor I could
possibly have had, telling me to be myself, and making suggestions all through the process that
he kept saying were just suggestions, but which were perfect. Thank you, Alberto.

Jenn Shore of Shore-Creative helped me with the production phase of Indesign; you wouldn’t
be reading this if she hadn’t patiently waded through my files to make them fit for print. It was
thankless grunt work for a great designer.You have my thanks, Jenn!

And thank you to all at CRC Press, including Randi Cohen, Production Editor Michele Dimont,
and Copy Editor Samar Haddad for turning the book into a real thing.

Thank you to my art teachers, starting with Ian Fleming-Williams, whose newly constructed
art building at Charterhouse was my refuge from sports and military hero-worship at the
school, and who somehow got me an interview at the Royal College of Art (RCA), in London.
The kind people at the RCA told me I had to go to a regional college of art first, then apply
as a post-graduate.

I went to Hull College of Art, in Yorkshire, and met W.A. (Bill) Sillince, who taught illustration
there. He was a famous Punch cartoonist who drew with a pencil on coarse-grained paper,
giving them a softer look than the usual black and white line work of other cartoonists. He
helped me put together a portfolio that ultimately got me accepted to the Royal College.

There, Paul Hogarth (yes, related to William), a great illustrator and visual reporter, took a
bunch of us from the RCA on a sketching trip to Amsterdam, and sat and drew alongside
us. While we dutifully tried to represent what was in front of us, Paul rearranged the view
to make it even more iconically Dutch. He knew that what was left on the paper was more
important than fidelity to the scene. Also at the RCA, Quentin Blake (now Sir Quentin),
another Punch artist, taught us with a gentle charm, just like his drawings; and one more
RCA teacher, Anthony Froshaug, a proponent of strictly gridded Swiss typography, who knew
where I had gone to school (he went to the same one), and who told me that I should do
better in his classes because of that experience. It was a good school, but right then I was just
happy to be at art college, away from expectations of a career in law or politics, or business.
Froshaug’s comments, while harsh at the time, pushed me. A good teacher!

To Brian Haynes, who told me I wasn’t a very good illustrator when I interned with him at the
Sunday Times Magazine, while I was a student at the RCA. Brian told me to combine what little
illustration talent I may have had with information. When he left the Times and became Art
Director of other magazines in London, he gave me lots of freelance graphics jobs.
200 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



To David Driver, who beautifully redesigned the stuffy Radio Times for the BBC, and
commissioned me almost weekly for the magazine. He got me to interview the sports and
science radio and TV commentators whose on-air broadcasts I was going to illustrate. I took
those graphics to New York when I met Walter Bernard at Time.

To Walter himself, an unfailingly kind man and terrific Art Director, who championed my work
at Time in the face of opposition from editors who were resistant to change at first. Walter’s
personal open-door office policy welcomed collaboration from anyone with a good idea.
To my core team at Time, the researchers Noel McCoy and Deborah Wells, and my assistant
Nino Telak. I have come to realize that these three names should have been printed next to
mine on every chart published in Time.

Many Art Directors helped launch my return to freelance life after Time. I thank them all, but
would like to mention these by name: Richard Aloisio of The New York Times, Holly Holliday of
Attaché magazine, Bambi Nicklen of Stanford magazine, Jen Christensen of Scientific American
magazine; and Rudy Hoglund, Tom Bentkowski, Robert Priest, and Bob Ciano who between
them oversaw art and graphics at many of America’s best magazines.

To Amanda Hostalka who created an exhibition of my work at Stevenson University, and
Michael Stoll who later mounted a traveling exhibition that opened in Munich and went on to
Zeist, in Holland, and Ohio University. What they did by searching through my archives was a
tremendous help for me finding (and remembering) stuff you see here.

To my fellow English-turned-American infographic colleague and friend, John Grimwade, for
years of laughter and rants about the state of infographics, often over lunch at the bottom
of the Empire State Building in New York. John read a draft of the book and made thoughtful
suggestions for changes. To Christoph Blumrich, who held a position at Newsweek similar to
mine at Time, and who once saw a freelance job I had done that wasn’t very good, and told
me that I should treat every single job with as much integrity as I could, however small. To
Jon Schwabish, R.J. Andrews, and Jason Forrest, fellow writer-infographic practitioners, whose
books and relentless search for historical infographics forerunners are continually inspiring.

To Richard Saul Wurman, who invited me to speak at his second TED Conference, in 1990, and
subsequently asked me to work with him on four health-related books, then other clients, and
finally as a co-author on Mortality. To Rick Smolan, whose used my graphics to explain non-
photographic things in his wonderful photo-based books. To Julius Wiedemann, who included
me in Taschen’s door-stoppingly huge books of graphics (together with Sandra Rendgen), and
shepherded my Crazy Competitions through a difficult birth at Taschen. To Ben Handicott and
Robin Barton of Lonely Planet, who let me make travel books that weren’t really about travel.

To Della van Heyst, Holly Brady, and Tina Weiner, who allowed me—encouraged, even—to
                                                                              THANK YOU 201



experiment with ‘performance’ graphics on stage during the wonderful Publishing Conferences
they ran at Stanford and Yale.To Guy Bailey, the most patient audio-visual technician ever, who
helped me mount some weird presentations at Stanford (one was a pre-PowerPoint show
that involved three 35-mm slide projectors pointing at different parts of the stage), and who
never questioned what on earth I was doing, but made it all work.

To Frank Dobyns for reading my attempt to explain how we smile. At 89, and suffering
from ALS, Frank overcame his disability to type, and managed to send me a carefully worded
critique. Thank you Frank; rest in peace.

To Dr James Wong whose careful cataract surgery gave me new eyes, and to Dr Noelbis Cid,
who looks after them, even though she hates my round, blue glasses.

To my son Rowland for making my graphics move in beautiful animation on the web, and
for long-distance computer-problem-solving FaceTime sessions between Westport and
Lido di Camaiore, Italy, during which he shows impressive patience in the face of my digital
incompetence, and then always solves the problems. Rowland made the website for this book:
www.joyfulinfographics.com.

Finally, thank you to my best friend. You know that without you, Erin, I could not have done
any of this.
202 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Credits

All images were drawn, photographed, or owned by me, except for those noted here.

I contacted the rightsholders that I was able to identify, but some didn’t reply to my
requests for permission, and some images could not be tracked down.

If anyone owns the rights to anything that I have reproduced, please forgive me,
and contact me here at nigel@nigelholmes.com, so that I can address the situation.

Page 11, Etching, and drawing of canoe yawl by George Holmes
12, Drawing of Humber sailing trawler by George Holmes
13, Map of the River Hull by George Holmes
16, Map of Yorkshire and Lancashire by H. Alnwick
17, Edward Lear book cover by Barnett Freedman
17, Detail of an advertisement from Punch magazine, January 4, 1950
41, Trafalgar stamp by Peter Grundy
41, Postcard of Queen Mary, Mayfair Cards of London
53, Sketch and map by R.M. Chapin Jr., Time magazine
57, Map by R.M. Chapin Jr., Time magazine
73–76, Graphics by myself and Peter Brookes, Radio Times
77, Photo by Tony Evans, Radio Times
78, 79, Graphic by myself and Robin Jacques, Radio Times
    (used with permission from John Paul Jacques)
84, Wee People by Alberto Cairo and Scott Klein. © 2018 ProPublica and Alberto Cairo
    Freely downloadable: https://github.com/propublica/weepeople
85, Little Man by Warren Goodrich, San Francisco Chronicle
97, Spratts logo by Max Field-Bush (1936)
99, Olympic icons: Katsumie Masuru & Yoshiro Yamashita (top); Otl Aicher (middle);
     Masaaki Hiromura (bottom)
100,101, Olympic icons by Álvaro Valiño for The Washington Post
102, Olympic icons by Sarah Rosenbaum
103, Group of 10 figures (bottom of page) by Gerd Arntz,
     © 2022 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York, c/o Pictoright Amsterdam
104, 2 figures (middle of page) by Gerd Arntz,
     © 2022 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York, c/o Pictoright Amsterdam
105, Icons by Shigetaka Kurita; Digital image © The Museum of Modern Art/
      Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY
107, Xu, Bing, Book from the Ground: Windows OLE Object, pages 64-65,
     © 2014 Xu Bing, by permission of The MIT Press
108, Semantography by Charles Bliss
                                                                                 CREDITS 203



108, LoCoS by Yukio Ota
109, Photo of smiley face in trees by Dave Killen, The Oregonian
109, Smiley logo by The Cherry Hut
111, I [Heart] NY by Milton Glaser (1975)
112, Icons for Schiphol Airport, courtesy of Mijksenaar, bv, Amsterdam
112, Symbols for Schiphol parking areas by Rob (Opland) Wout,
     © 2022 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York, c/o Pictoright Amsterdam
112, Photo of fly in urinal, courtesy of Mijksenaar, bv, Amsterdam
113, Damascus street signage by Luigi Farrauto
113, Cover of Kanji Pictographix by Michael Rowley
114,115, Icons by Álvaro Valiño for Rundfunk-Sinfonieorchester Berlin
145, Cover of I am a book. I am a portal to the universe by Stefanie Posavec and Miriam Quick
174, Chart by Philip A. Scheuer for National Lampoon
177, Chart by Jason Forrest, Gabrielle Merite, and Gergo Varga for McKinsey & Company
191, Clothing label (front and back) by L.L. Bean
204 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Index Wow, famous names! (Plus yours.)    Bowyer, Caroline, 122
                                          Brachiosauruses, 45
Adams, John, 22                           Brady, Holly, 127, 200
Advocate, the Devil’s, 83                 Braille, 37
Aicher, Otl, 99, 100                      Brinton, Willard, 84;
Alnwick, H., 16                           Brisbane, Arthur, 8
Aloisio, Richard, 175, 200                Brookes, Peter, 72–77
Alston, Kwaku, 119                        Brown, Adam, 140
American Social Health Association, 163   Brunel, Isambard Kingdom, 48
Anati, Emmanuel, 103                      Buck-passing, political, 58
Andrews, R.J., 200                        Byrne, David, 132, 134
Appendix, my, 17                          Cairo, Alberto, 84, 199
Appendix, 185                             Calf-A,Yesterday’s, 40
Arcimboldo, Giuseppe, 54                  Carlyle, Thomas, 7
Arntz, Gerd, 31, 103-104                  Casey, Susan, 167
Art Blob, 147                             Caterwauling, 158
Bach, J.S., 22                            Chalabi, Mona, 35
Bailey, Guy, 127, 200                     Channing, Carol, 173
Ball, Harvey Ross, 109                    Chantry, Art, 109
Barnum, P.T., 132                         Chapin, Robert M. Jr., 33, 53, 57
Barton, Robin, 200                        Chartjunk, 174, 179
Baumann, Mary K., 123                     Cherry Hut, The, 109
Bean, L.L., 191                           Chestnut, Joey, 129
Beatles, the, 16, 22                      Chocolates, Mackintosh’s Good News, 17
Beck, Harry, 32                           Chorus, Greek, 64, 154, 170
Beetle, Asian Longhorned, 62              Christiansen, Jen, 140, 200
Ben, Big, 48                              Ciano, Bob, 124, 200
Benenson, Fred, 107                       Cid, Dr. Noelbis, 201
Bentine, Michael, 17, 148                 Civilization, 23
Bentkowski, Tom, 123, 200                 Clark, Kenneth, 22, 23
Bernard, Walter, 33, 59, 140, 199, 200    Claus, Santa, 104
Bing, Xu, 107                             Cleese, John, 17
Bird, Kenneth (Fougasse), 18              Cohn, Neil, 108
Blake, Sir Quentin, 199                   Collins, Gail, 47
Blechman, Nicholas, 146                   Collins, Jim, 154
Bliss, Charles, 108                       Column, Nelson’s, 41
Blumrich, Christoph, 200                  Coltrane, John, 22
Book of Everything, the Bigger, 82        Comenius, Jan Amos, 28
Borge,Victor, 151                         Commercial and Political Atlas,The, 29
Botox, 150                                Confucius, 8
Bough, Frank, 76, 77                      Crazy Competitions, 82
                                                                       INDEX 205



Curtis, Richard, 90                   Fedex logo, 187, 189
da Vinci, Leonardo, 28, 47            Field, Kenneth, 32
Dad, my, 1, 16, 17                    Fleming-Williams, Ian, 199
Daniel, Jennifer, 146                 Flying Circus, Python’s, Monty, 17
David, Larry, 28                      Fogg, Pamela, 45
Davis, Miles, 22                      Food and Drink Infographics, 66, 88
Dear Data, 35                         Forrest, Jason, 177, 200
Debussy, Claude, 22                   Four stomachs (in a giraffe), 68
Dendur, Temple of, 23                 Freedman, Barnett, 17
Descartes, René, 29                   Froshaug, Anthony, 199
Design, Rhode Island School of, 147   #@*!, 63
Dewey, John, 174                      Fun, please don’t forget to have, 182
Dick, Emoji, 107                      G.V., Xaquín, 141
Dick, Moby, 107                       Garcia, Mario, 8
Dickens, Charles, 41                  Geographia, 27
Dionne, Jennifer, 144, 145            Gill, Eric, 18
Disease, Lyme, 153                    Glaser, Milton, 70, 111
Docomo, 106                           Golon, Marty, 165
Dog, Hound, 52                        Goodrich, Warren, 85
Dog, Spratts, icon of a, 97           Goons,The, 17
Dog, tail wagging the, 52             Grand Central Terminal, 42
Dragga, Sam, 83                       Grid, Cartesian, 29
Driver, David, 72, 78, 79, 199        Great, Alexander the, 88
Duchenne, Guillaume, 149              Grimwade, John, 83, 130, 200
Dvorak, Antonin, 59                   Grogan, David, 144
Eating Contest, Hot Dog, 128, 129     Grundy, Peter, 41, 146
Egyptian, walk like an, 27            Gump, Forrest, 16
Eiffel Tower, 43                      Guy, Wise, 164
Einstein, Albert, 141–144             Hampton, David, 109
Elvish, 107                           Handel, Frederick, 41
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 191             Handicott, Ben, 200
Emoji, 104                            Harlem, Knut, 102
Empire State Building, 40, 43, 200    Harris, Jacob, 83,
Enomoto, Tota, 105                    Harrison, George, 16
Enriquez, Juan, 61                    Harrison, Richard Edes, 33
Enthusiasm, Curb Your, 28, 42         Harvey, Michael, 61
Esperanto, 107                        Hay, Nannie, 1
Evans, Tony, 77                       Haynes, Brian, 12, 41, 199
Fahlman, Scott, 104, 105              Hehehe, 107
Farrauto, Luigi, 113                  Helium, fun with, 133
Father, my, 16, 17                    Heller, Steve, 109
206 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Hiromura, Masaaki, 99                       Kisman, Max, 112
Hockney, David, 169                         Kittyballs, 176
Hogarth, Paul, 199                          Klein, Scott, 84
Hoglund, Rudy, 57, 200                      Klingon, 107
Hokusai, 52                                 Kobayashi, Takeru, 128, 129
Holling, Holling Clancy, 146                Kurita, Shigetaka, 105
Holly Holliday, 154, 200                    Lamb, Shanna, 40
Holmes, George, 11, 12, 15–17, 23, 41, 80   Lasso,Ted, 42
Holmes, Jeremy, 1, 16                       Lear, Edward, 17, 41
Holmes, Kai, 106, 107                       Lee, Grace, 176
Holmes, Mobil, 174                          Leiber, Jerry, 52
Holmes, Rowland, 201                        License, Artistic, 33
Holmes, Sherlock, 155                       Little Man, 85
Holtskog, Reidar, 102                       LoCoS, 108
Hopkins, Will, 123                          Loos, Adolf, 7
Hostalka, Amanda, 97, 200                   Louis XIV, King, 88
House, The White, 55                        Lupi, Giorgia, 35
Hurley, John, 86                            Lupton, Ellen, 103
Idea, Dr., 176                              Lutz, Eleanor, 35
Idea, Dry, 176                              M&M, 53
I Heart Design, 109                         MacNightlight, Flora, 27
Instant Expert, 4, 161                      MacNightshade, Flora, 27
Isotype, 23, 31, 84, 104, 106 108, 146      Magazines and newspapers
it, Post-, 47                                AARP Bulletin, 164
Ittner, Marty, 169                           American History, 57
Jacob, Heiner, 99                            Attaché, 56, 64-65, 81, 154–160, 170
Jacques, Robin, 78, 79                        Business 2.0, 167
Jaegerman, Megan, 35                          Currency, 123
James, LeBron, 132                            Details, 124
Jazz, 5                                       Discover, 141–144
Jobs, Steve, 21                               Eight by Eight, 176
Jochheim, Konrad, 86                          Esquire, 87
Joke, the world’s funniest, 148               Fortune, 33, 85
Joplin, Janis, 22                             Glamour, 90
Jordan, Michael, 132                          Golf Digest, 117
Kahn, Fritz, 32                               Industry Standard, 124
Kaku, Michio, 141–144                         Kids Discover, 123
Kasofsky, Phillip, 61                         Middlebury, 45
Kaye, Neil, 190                               Money, 94
Kennedy, Pagan, 104                           National Lampoon, 174
Keyser, Jim, 86                               Navigator, 66
                                                                                   INDEX 207



 Neshan, 102                                     Modley, Rudolf, 31
 Network World, 122                              Mojtahedi, Farahnaz, 102
 Northwestern, 162                               Molecules, turkey, 157
 Parenting, 89                                   Mondale, Walter F., 62
 Puck, 104                                       Monk, Thelonious, 5, 22
 Punch, 18                                       Monopoly, 52
 Radio Times, 20, 43, 48, 72–79, 95, 98, 103     Monroe, Marilyn, 173
 Scientific American, 140, 141                   Morphine, 150
 Stanford, 67, 121, 145, 166, 168                Morsia, Elliott, 199
 The New York Times, 35                          Mortality, 50, 51, 110
 The New Yorker, 59                              Moshus, Petter, 102
 The Observer, 12, 15                            Mrak, Michael, 144
 This Old House, 122                             Mum, my, 1, 82
 The San Francisco Chronicle, 85                 Muybridge, Eadweard, 18, 41, 127, 128
 Time, 8, 33, 52, 53, 58, 59, 62, 92, 139, 140   Naadam, 82
       152, 173, 174, 179, 180, 181              Negroni, 69
 US Airways, 94                                  Neurath, Marie, (Reidemeister), 31, 146
 USAToday, 54, 55, 90                            Neurath, Otto, 26, 32, 84, 103, 104, 108,
 Vanity Fair, 124                                  146, 188
Makris, Melissa, 93                              New York, I Love, 111
Manicule, 97                                     Newhall, Scott, 85
Martin, Charles, 19                              Nicklen, Bambi, 67, 121, 166, 169, 200
Marx, Karl, 84                                   Nightingale, Florence, 27, 30
Mary, 2 Queen, 40                                Nightingown, Florence, 27
Masuru, Katsumie, 99                             North, Oliver, 58
MC2, E=, 143                                     Okrand, Marc, 107
McCoy, Noel, 174, 200                            Oliver, John, 23
McFarlane, Robert, 58                            Opium, 150
McKenna, Erin, 86, 201                           Opland, 112
McKinsey & Company, 177                          Orbis Sensualium Pictus, 28
McWhorter, John, 191                             Ota,Yukio, 108
Meehan, Tommy, 86                                Painters, Cave, 25, 26, 97, 13i, 136
Melville, Herman, 107                            Parker, Charlie, 81
Merite, Gabrielle, 177                           Peels, banana, 52
Messiah, 41                                      Petranek, Stephen, 144
Meta, 125                                        Phillips, Owen, 59
Metaphor, 52                                     Pictorial Maps, 27
Middlebury College, 45                           Pinhole, 146
Mijksenaar, Paul, 112, 113                       Playfair, William, 29
Milligan, Spike, 17, 148                         Poindexter, John, 58
Minard, Charles-Joseph, 83                       Porcupine, the data-rich, 177
208 JOYFUL INFOGRAPHICS



Posavec, Stephanie, 35, 145     Sellers, Peter, 17, 148
PowerPoint, 25, 128, 135, 200   Semantography, 108
Presley, Elvis, 52, 84          Senese, Christina, 162
Priest, Robert, 87, 176         Sequiturs, non, 17
Prinz, Karl, 86                 Shakespeare, William, 52, 190
ProPublica, 84                  Sheemia, 188
Prosody, visual, 38–40          Shulpig, Karl, 86
Ptolemy, 27                     Sibelius, Jean, 22
Ptolemy, Mrs, 27                Sillince W.A., 199
Puns, bad, see silliness        silliness, see Puns, bad
Pyramid, US Food, 54, 55        Silphium, 110
Queen, The, 20, 78, 79          Smartie, 53
Quick, Miriam, 35, 145          Smile-o-graph, 148
Rand, Paul, 6                   Smile, please, 150
Reagan President, 58, 62        Smiling statues, Cypriot, 190
Redding, Otis, 22               Smolan, Rick, 200
Reidemeister, Marie, 31         Stanford University, 18, 127, 145, 176
Rendgen, Sandra, 200            Stanford, Leland, 18, 128
Revere, Paul, 139               Stark, Pegie, 8
Ride, a bumpy, 52               Stea, Lenny, 127
RKC!, 118                       Stereotypes, 180
Rorick, George, 90              Stevenson University, 97
Rosenbaum, Sarah, 102           Stoll, Michael, 200
Rothe, Larry, 22                Stoller, Mike, 52
Rowley, Michael, 113            Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 41
Rumsey, David, 37               Studio Muti, 146
Salad, Greek, 27                Surgery, cataract, 53
Saltz, Ina, 117                 Sutnar, Ladislav, 188
Sam, Uncle, 89                  Swift, Jonathan, 41
Sand, Åsmund, 102               Tapestry, Bayeaux, 27
Sans, Gill, 18, 21              Telak, Neven, 86
Scale, 12-tone, 59              Telak, Nino, 200
Scher, Paula, 35                Thornton, ‘Big Mama,’ 52
Scheuer, Phillip. A., 174       Thumb, Tom, 132
Schüler, Fritz, 32              Tolkein, J.R.R., 107
Schwabish, Jon, 200             Tom, Dick, and Harry, 7
Secombe, Harry, 17              Torres García, Joaquín, 188
Seidman, Eric, 164              Trek, Star, 107
Seinfeld, 42                    Tufte, Edward, 174
Seitz, Philipp, 86              Umami, 161
Sellar, W.C., 27                Unicode Consortium, 105
                                              INDEX 209



Valiño, Álvaro, 100, 101, 114, 115
van Bedaf, Jos, 112
van Beethoven, Ludwig, 22
van de Rohe, Mies, 7
van Eyck, Jan, 168
van Gogh,Vincent, 129
van Heyst, Della, 61, 121, 127, 200
Varga, Gergo, 177
Vaziri, Aidin, 85
Venturi, Robert, 7
Victoria, Queen, 41
Voss, Dan, 83
Wagner, Richard, 22
Wallis, John, 125
Washington Monument, 42
Washington, George, 64, 65
Weems, Scott, 148
Weiner, Tina, 200
Weissman, Dr. Irving, 67
Wells, Deborah, 174, 200
Whales, Blue, 45
WHO, 51
Wiedemann, Julius, 200
Willard, Emma, 25, 30
Wiseman, Richard, 148
Wong, Dr. James, 201
Wood, Grant, 52
Wordless Diagrams, 164, 189
Wozniak, Steve, 21
Wurman, Richard Saul, 46, 50, 116, 119, 200
Yamashita,Yoshiro, 99
Yeatman, R.J., 27
YMCA, 4
Yolélé, 35
Zamenhof, Ludwik, 107
Zebra, the edited, 177
Zuckerberg, Mark, 125
                J YFUL
             INFOGRAPHICS

In Joyful Infographics: A Friendly, Human Approach to Data, one of the leading
graphic designers of recent times shows how a judicious use of humor can
make infographics more understandable. Written in non-academic, easy-to-
understand language, and with historical and contemporary visual examples
presented throughout, this small book provides a short history of light-
hearted graphics. The text outlines nine clear ways to make graphics more
understandable, explores the importance of the audience, shows you how
to make information come alive during presentations through live-action
‘performance’ graphics, discusses why joy and smiling are good for you, and
shows you how not to overdo it.

Even if a subject is delicate, controversial, or taboo, being graphically friendly to
the audience is the right way to explain it. It is the opposite of being clinically
cold and just presenting the facts. If you can get readers to smile—the smile
of recognition when they understand the graphic—you are more than halfway
toward getting them to continue reading, and understanding, the intention of
the piece. Joyful Infographics teaches you how to do just that.

Nigel Holmes has written ten books (now eleven!) on information design and
infographics. He is the former graphics director of Time magazine, has lectured
globally, and has taught at Stanford and Yale. His diverse list of clients includes
the BBC, Ford, Heinz, BMW, Sony, Estée Lauder, and Apple, and his work has
appeared in a wide range of media including the New York Times, Rolling Stone,
Esquire, Sports Illustrated, New Scientist, National Geographic, Scientific American,
and the New Yorker. He has given three TED talks, his work has been exhibited
internationally, and he is the recipient of multiple awards, including the Lifetime
Achievement Award from The Society of News Design, and the Ladislav Sutner
Award.
